arXiv:2509.06503v3 [cs.AI] 21 May 2026

2026-5-22
An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Eser Ayg³n1,*, Anastasiya Belyaeva2,*, Gheorghe Comanici1,*, Marc Coram2,*, Hao Cui2,*, Jake Garrison3,*, Renee Johnston2,*, Anton Kast2,*, Cory Y. McLean2,*, Peter Norgaard2,*, Zahra Shamsi2,*, David Smalling1,*, James Thompson2,*, Subhashini Venugopalan2,*, Brian P. Williams2,*, Chujun He2,4,**, Sarah Martinson2,5,**, Martyna Plomecka2,6,**, Lai Wei2, Yuchen Zhou2, Qian-Ze Zhu2,5,**, Matthew Abraham2, Erica Brand2, Anna Bulanova1, Jeffrey A. Cardille2,7, Chris Co2, Scott Ellsworth2, Grace Joseph2, Malcolm Kane2, Ryan Krueger2,5,**, Johan Kartiwa2, Dan Liebling2, Jan-Matthis Lueckmann2, Paul Raccuglia2, Xuefei (Julie) Wang2,8,**, Katherine Chou2, James Manyika2, Yossi Matias2, John C. Platt2, Lizzie Dorfman2, Shibl Mourad1, and Michael P. Brenner2,5, 1Google DeepMind, Montrķal, Quebec H2Z 1W5, Canada, 2Google Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA, 3Google Platforms and Devices, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA, 4Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA, 5School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA, 6Google DeepMind, New York, New York 10011, USA, 7Faculty of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, McGill University, Montrķal, Quebec H3A 0G4, Canada, 8California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
*Equal contribution in alphabetical order. ** Carried out as part of a student researchership at Google Research.  To whom correspondence should be addressed: shibl@google.com, mbrenner@google.com
The cycle of scientific discovery is frequently bottlenecked by the slow, manual creation of software to support computational experiments1. To address this, we present Empirical Research Assistance (ERA), an AI system that creates expert-level scientific software whose goal is to maximize a quality metric. The system uses a Large Language Model (LLM) and Tree Search (TS)2 to systematically improve the quality metric and intelligently navigate the large space of possible solutions. ERA achieves expert-level results when it explores and integrates complex research ideas from external sources. The effectiveness of tree search is demonstrated across a diverse range of tasks. In bioinformatics, ERA discovered 40 novel methods for singlecell data analysis that outperformed the top human-developed methods on a public leaderboard. In epidemiology, ERA generated 14 models that outperformed the CDC ensemble and all other individual models for forecasting COVID-19 hospitalizations. ERA also produced expert-level software for geospatial analysis, neural activity prediction in zebrafish, and numerical solution of integrals, and a novel rule-based construction for time series forecasting. By devising and implementing novel solutions to diverse tasks, ERA represents a significant step towards accelerating scientific progress.
Keywords: Tree Search, Generative AI, Scorable Scientific Tasks, Empirical Software
*Equal contribution in alphabetical order. ** Carried out as part of a student researchership at Google Research.  To whom correspondence should be addressed: shibl@google.com, mbrenner@google.com

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Introduction
Empirical software, designed to maximize a measurable quality score, is ubiquitous and central to many scientific endeavors. Empirical software has recently enabled a number of Nobel Prizes in Chemistry: in 1998 for Density Functional Theory3,4, in 2013 for molecular dynamics simulation5 and in 2024 for protein structure prediction6,7. Empirical software underlies our ability to create models of complex systems, ranging from parameterizations of a vertical column of the earth's atmosphere for weather modeling8, to the parameterization of stress response in a turbulent fluid flow9, to the prediction of social systems10,11.
However, empirical software for science is slow and difficult to create. Domain-specific empirical software requires tedious work1, often over many years. When empirical software is used to test complex hypotheses, it becomes ever more difficult to write purely from first principles. There usually is no systematic search for alternative approaches. Design choices are often governed by intuition or expediency, rather than exhaustive experimentation. Creating the software is so time-consuming that it severely limits the possibilities that can be productively explored12.
Here we present Empirical Research Assistance (ERA), an AI-based system that systematically and automatically creates empirical software to solve scorable tasks. ERA is based on an LLM that rewrites software to attempt to improve its quality score. ERA creates multiple software candidate solutions, and uses Tree Search2 to decide which candidates merit further exploration (Fig. 1a). While there are many ways of designing a code mutation system13Ł16, we developed ERA by competing in Kaggle competitions (Fig. 1b), described below. We augment code mutation with research ideas obtained from a range of sources including highly-cited papers, specialized textbooks, and search engine results (Fig. 1c). In practice, these ideas can be injected either directly by the user or automatically using a search engine to access research in the literature. The LLM uses this injected guidance in writing code.
We find that ERA produces software that outperforms the state-of-the-art in scorable tasks spanning broad scientific disciplines. This expert-level performance arises because of the ability to exhaustively and tirelessly carry out solution searches at unprecedented scale, identifying needle-in-the-haystack high quality solutions.
Results
Overview of Scorable Tasks
We develop ERA on Kaggle playground competitions, and test it by selecting scorable tasks based on scientific or engineering problems of high relevance in diverse fields. These scorable tasks are listed below, with per-node computational costs outlined in Supplementary Table S1.
scRNA-seq batch integration:17 This task requires distinguishing subtle biological signals from noise in high-dimensional sparse datasets. By removing confounding factors, we can enable large-scale multi-lab transcriptomic data integration.
CDC COVID Forecasting:18 This task requires predicting non-linear disease dynamics from lagged and noisy real-time data. By predicting COVID cases several weeks in advance, we can inform public health policy and resource allocations.
Time series forecasting:19 This task requires predicting time series outcomes across a range of datasets and applications.
Geospatial segmentation:20 This task requires performing dense pixel-wise multi-label semantic seg-
2

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

a

Tree of candidate

code solutions

Scorable problem

Prompt

LLM Improvement

Research ideas
b

Code sandbox

Finish Further exploration

c Expert

Write

Scientific papers Summarize

Prior ideas +

Recombine

Gemini Deep Research

Figure 1 | Schematic and performance of ERA. a, Schematic of ERA algorithm. A scorable task, together with research ideas proposing methods to solve the task, are fed to an LLM, which produces code to evaluate the scorable task in a sandbox. This is then embedded within a tree search algorithm, whereby new nodes are chosen balancing exploitation and exploration, sampling from the LLM (Methods). b, Performance of code generation methods on Kaggle Playground benchmark. Results report the average public leaderboard percentile performance over 16 tasks. Methods based on ERA are listed in bold. TS, ERA-based tree search. BDT, boosted decision tree. Error bars indicate standard deviation of performance between different competitions in the benchmark. c, The system automates empirical software development by iteratively optimizing predictive models and computational algorithms based on research ideas and a defined quality metric. We use LLM summaries of scientific papers or AI assisted literature as part of the prompt, and also recombine successful implementations of ideas to create more powerful methods.

3

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
mentation on complex satellite imagery. Better segmentation can lead to large improvements in environmental monitoring and disaster response.
ZAPBench:21 This task requires predicting the activity of >70,000 neurons across an entire vertebrate brain. Performing well on this benchmark may lead to a systems-level understanding of brain function and behavior.
Numerically solving difficult integrals: This task requires solving integrals that defy standard numerical algorithms. It is useful for modeling physical and engineering systems.
Kaggle Playground Benchmark
We designed ERA to score highly on a curated set of Kaggle competitions. Kaggle calibrates human performance with percentile rank on a leaderboard, and we score code by submitting directly to Kaggle. Our benchmark consists of 16 playground competitions from the 2023 season, encompassing regression and classification tasks (Supplementary Table S2). Playground competitions are an ideal benchmark because they offer fast iteration, simplicity, and calibration against thousands of humans. Achieving a high score requires creating complex code without requiring solving a sophisticated scientific task.
Our basic strategy uses a simple prompting template (Supplementary Table S3) that concatenates the competition description with the previous trial. Fig. 1b evaluates the performance of ERA with the average public percentile rank across all 16 playground competitions: ERA substantially beats a single LLM call and best-of-1000 LLM calls, and also outperforms AIDE13, owing to its ability to maintain a diverse tree of candidates, allowing it to backtrack when a specific line of code mutation plateaus. During the search, the system discovers strategies leading to abrupt jumps in the score, with the accumulation of these jumps leading to the highest quality solutions.
Problem-specific advice added to the prompt substantially improves performance. We illustrate this with two examples. In TS with expert advice we give ERA standard advice to win Kaggle competitions (Supplementary Table S4). In TS with Boosted Decision Tree (BDT) we tell ERA to implement a boosted decision tree library from scratch, without using standard packages (Supplementary Table S5). We manually verified in both cases that resulting codes followed the advice.
We now evaluate ERA on six benchmarks in different scientific fields, exploring distinct ways to incorporate research ideas to improve system performance (Fig. 1c, Methods).
Genomics: Batch Integration of Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Data
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has revolutionized our ability to dissect cellular heterogeneity, discover novel cell types, infer gene regulatory networks and developmental trajectories, and improve therapeutic target prioritization22, enabling hundreds of millions of cells to be individually sequenced within thousands of datasets23Ł25. A major challenge required to jointly analyze many disparate scRNA-seq datasets is to computationally remove complex batch effects present across samples while preserving biological signals26. Nearly 300 tools exist to perform batch integration of scRNA-seq data27, and multiple benchmarks have been developed for assessing metrics of batch effect removal and conservation of biological variability28Ł30.
To assess ERA performance on this task, we used the OpenProblems v2.0.0 batch integration benchmark30. As of July 2025, this active benchmark evaluates 15 state-of-the-art methods and eight control methods on 13 different metrics that quantify both the ability to remove batch effects in the data and retain variability attributable to true biological differences in six datasets spanning
4

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
human and mouse25 (Fig. 2a). To avoid overfitting to the benchmark, we used a separate dataset for ERA optimization (Methods, Supplementary Fig. S1). For each ERA run, we selected the best solution based on the performance on this training set, and report the performance on the holdout OpenProblems datasets (n=1,747,937 total cells). We prompt the LLM with a description of the single cell batch integration problem, code for reading in the dataset, code for evaluation metrics, and optional text with a particular research idea.
First, we ran ERA without guidance, and observed that its solution is conceptually similar to ComBat33, yet improved over the current OpenProblems leaderboard (No advice (TS) in Fig. 2b). We then evaluated whether ERA could improve upon existing algorithms. We selected nine methods from the OpenProblems benchmark, including the six highest-performing methods (Methods). For each method, we obtained the paper PDF and used Gemini 2.5 Pro to add a brief summary to the prompt (Methods). In pairwise comparisons, ERA outperformed the corresponding published result for eight of the nine methods in overall score (Fig. 2b). The top-performing method was an ERA implementation of Batch Balanced K-Nearest Neighbors (BBKNN (TS))34, yielding a 14% overall improvement over the best published method (ComBat33) and equaled or outperformed the corresponding published BBKNN in every dataset and across 11/13 metrics (Fig. 2b). This performance highlights its capacity to effectively remove batch effects without compromising biological signals (Supplementary Fig. S2). We observed that ERA is also able to produce performant implementations for an algorithm without publicly-available code (TabVI35, Extended Data Fig. 1). Importantly, expert manual inspection of the code solutions proposed by ERA confirmed that nearly all implementations adhered to the requested algorithms (Extended Data Table 1), with performance largely consistent across replicate runs of methods (Extended Data Fig. 1). Additionally, ERA demonstrated improvements even when compared to base methods with optimized hyperparameters, indicating that its contribution extends beyond hyperparameter tuning (Methods, Supplementary Fig. S3). Extended Data Fig. 2 shows the tree structure and evolution of the maximum score as a function of the number of nodes in the tree for the best performing model BBKNN (TS).
For BBKNN (TS), part of the performance boost came from combining two existing methods, ComBat33 and BBKNN, rather than simply implementing BBKNN (Fig. 2c). In particular, while the original BBKNN method computes neighbors using PCA embeddings, BBKNN (TS) computes neighbors using ComBat-corrected PCA embeddings, removing global linear batch-associated variance. Both implementations then compute -nearest neighbors across batches and construct a graph (with differences in exact implementation), thus removing local batch effects (Supplementary Table S6). Manual modification of BBKNN (TS) and the published BBKNN implementation confirmed that using Combat-corrected PCA embeddings is critical for improving both implementations (Extended Data Fig. 3), confirming the value in idea recombination.
This motivated an exploration of systematic ways to generate more complex research ideas. First, similar to how scientists often combine ideas to create a novel approach, we programmatically generated 55 "recombinations" of all pairs of the 11 methods described above (No advice, nine replications, and TabVI; hereafter: "base methods") based on summaries of the code for each method (Methods, Supplementary Table S7). We ran ERA, prompted with each of these recombinations. For each base method and recombination group, we compared the average scores for the top nodes over the intersection of metrics that were successfully computed for all three methods. Strikingly, recombination implementations of tree search frequently outperformed their base counterparts, with 24 of the 55 recombination solutions (44%) outperforming both of their base methods and 22 of the remaining 31 recombination solutions outperforming one of the two base methods (Extended Data Fig. 4). Second, we used Gemini Deep Research31 and AI co-scientist32 to generate and implement 21 additional ideas (Methods). After ERA was applied to each, 6/11 base methods, 29/55 recombination, 4/9 Deep Research, and 1/12 AI co-scientist methods (40 of 87) outperform all methods currently
5

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

a

b

Combine

Poor

 Good

PC2 PC2

PC1
c d

PC1

Overall score

0

0.5

Score per dataset (mean over metrics)

Score per metric (mean over datasets)

1 0 0.4 0.6 0.8

1

0 0.4 0.6 0.8

1

Figure 2 | Performance of ERA on scRNA-seq batch integration. a, Schematic of the batch integration task, in which disparate datasets (teal and red) are processed to remove batch effects in the data while retaining biological variability. b, Performance of tree search (method names bolded and suffixed by "(TS)") compared to the analogous published method on the OpenProblems benchmark v2.0.030. "Perfect embedding by celltype with jitter" is a positive control method that represents the best possible performance and "Shuffle integration by batch" is a negative control that does not perform any batch integration. Overall score is the mean over all datasets and metrics. Each Datasets column shows the mean of all metrics computed over that dataset. Each Metrics column shows the mean of that metric computed over all datasets. Metrics were assigned a value of 0 if they could not be computed or if their performance was worse than the lowest negative control; these are displayed as empty. c, Performance improvements annotated with code innovation for the top-performing batch balanced -nearest neighbors (BBKNN) implementation. ComBat-based embedding generation was introduced in implementation attempt 429. d, Overall score for OpenProblems benchmark v2.0.030 non-control methods, ERA with and without recombination of ideas, Gemini Deep Research31, and ERA with AI co-scientist32. Y-axis lower bound is the overall score of the "Shuffle integration by batch" negative control method. Seven recombination, five base methods, and two AI co-scientist methods that do not match its performance are omitted. * indicates the method is a recombination, even if not explicitly prompted for recombination. TS, ERA-based tree search; fastMNN, batchelor fastMNN; mnnCorrect, batchelor mnnCorrect.
6

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
published on the OpenProblems leaderboard (Fig. 2d).
To further understand the conceptual space explored by ERA, we obtained embeddings for each generated code using Gemini text embedding model and computed cosine similarities (Supplementary Fig. S4). Visualization of the embeddings revealed distinct clusters, generally representing deeplearning based methods and non-deep-learning methods, suggesting that ERA is able to generate a variety of solutions (Supplementary Fig. S5).
Public Health: Prediction of U.S. COVID-19 Hospitalizations
The primary U.S. benchmark for COVID-19 forecasting is the COVID-19 Forecast Hub (CovidHub)18, a large, collaborative effort coordinated by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). CovidHub receives weekly forecasts from dozens of expert-led teams across academia, industry, and government, each using different methodologies. These weekly forecasts must cover new COVID-19 related hospitalizations across 52 U.S. states and territories for the current week and three subsequent weeks over 23 specified quantiles. Submissions are evaluated using the Weighted Interval Score (WIS), which rewards both accuracy and well-calibrated uncertainty.
Top-performing individual models include classic autoregressive time-series approaches (e.g., UMASS-ar6_pooled), gradient boosting machine learning models (e.g., UMASS-gbqr), and epidemiological models based on renewal equations and Bayesian estimation of the reproductive number (e.g., CEPH-Rtrend_covid). CovidHub leverages this methodological diversity by integrating submissions into the CovidHub Ensemble, a robust aggregate forecast that has historically provided the gold standard for epidemiological prediction in the U.S.
We designed a rigorous retrospective study to assess ERA performance in this competitive environment, using data available on May 1 2025. For every forecasting period, we ran ERA to optimize and select a model using data from the preceding six weeks, creating a rolling validation window throughout the 2024-2025 season (Fig. 3a), with data splits elaborated in Supplementary Table S8. The weekly performance of our resulting `Google Retrospective' model is detailed in the time-series leaderboard (Fig. 3b), which visualizes our model's performance advantage relative to the CovidHubensemble and other top-performing teams. The temporal variation of WIS for each of the separate validation splits is shown for the best replicate (Extended Data Fig. 5) and across replicates (Supplementary Fig. S6). A direct jurisdiction-level comparison confirms our model achieved a lower (better) WIS in a majority of states (Fig. 3c,d). Supplementary Figs. S7 and S8 compare prediction curves for representative locations between different models.
Overall, our model achieved the highest performance with an average WIS of 26, outperforming the official CovidHub Ensemble's average WIS of 29. A representative tree and breakthrough plot is shown in Extended Data Fig. 6.
Beyond this retrospective performance, we investigated ERA's ability to explore the solution space more broadly by replicating, recombining, and generating entirely new forecasting strategies (Fig. 3e). First, we tested its ability to replicate existing methods from other teams using only their brief public descriptions from the CovidHub (Supplementary Tables S9 and S10). Our treesearch-based implementations (`Base Method (TS)') not only adhered to the provided instructions (Supplementary Table S11) but also exceeded the performance of the original submissions in six of the eight cases tested; the two models that performed worse (replicating JHU_CSSE-CSSE_Ensemble and OHT_JHU-nbxd) did not use external data present for the original method implementations. Next, we explored whether solutions could be improved through recombination. For this experiment, we prompted an LLM to analyze the core principles of two different parent models and then used its synthesis to instruct ERA to generate a novel hybrid strategy combining their respective strengths. Of
7

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Figure 3 | Performance of ERA on COVID-19 forecasting. a, Rolling validation window used for the forecasting experiments. Each search's output is validated internally on a preceding block of time (blue), and the resulting model is then used to make predictions for its corresponding forecasting period (orange). Training data includes all dates on or after 2020-08-08 and prior to the validation set. b, Time-series leaderboard showing weekly forecasting performance (Average WIS) for participating teams and our 'Google Retrospective' model, ordered by average WIS. Scores are aggregated across all 52 jurisdictions and four forecast horizons. The number within each cell is the model's absolute Average WIS for that week. The cell's background color visualizes the performance relative to the CovidHub-ensemble, with blue indicating a lower (better) WIS and red indicating a higher (worse) WIS. c, Direct jurisdiction-level comparison of forecasting error (Average WIS) between our model and the 'CovidHub-ensemble', demonstrating our model's superior performance in a majority of locations. d, Geographic distribution of our model's forecasting error (Average WIS), aggregated over the entire 2024/25 COVID-19 season. Lower error values (lighter colors) indicate better performance. e, Comparison of aggregate forecasting performance for various modeling strategies. This includes baseline models from the CovidHub competition, our retrospective model, our replications of submitted models, novel hybrid models generated through recombination, deep research31 and AI co-scientist32. 14 strategies (10 recombination; two Deep Research; one AI co-scientist and one replicated baseline) outperform the official CovidHub-ensemble for the 3-week (3 reference dates ū 4 time horizons ū 52 jurisdictions) evaluation period. Models that perform worse than CovidHub-baseline are not shown.
8

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

26 generated hybrid models (`Recombination (TS)'), 11 achieved a WIS score superior to both of their parent models (Extended Data Fig. 7). We manually verified that output code for all recombination experiments contained relevant aspects from both parent codes (Supplementary Table S11). Finally, we used Gemini Deep Research31 and AI co-scientist32 to generate novel forecasting ideas which were then implemented using ERA. In total, this systematic exploration yielded 14 distinct strategies that outperformed the official CovidHub-ensemble: 10 from recombination, two from Deep Research, one from AI co-scientist, and one of our replicated baselines. Cosine similarities between embeddings for each generated code show clustering between different methods (Supplementary Fig. S9). An extended performance plot including the 9 TS models and 3 other submissions that did not outperform the baseline, alongside their corresponding validation performance, is provided in Supplementary Figs. S10 and S11. Examples of prediction curves are shown in Supplementary Fig. S12.
A deeper analysis of these 14 top-performing strategies reveals key patterns in how ERA achieves superior performance. The recombination models, which constitute the majority of the winners, highlight a clear pattern of synergistic hybridization. Two base models appear most frequently in these successful hybrids: the simple, climatology-based CMU-climate_baseline and the statistical autoregressive model UMass-ar6_pooled. This suggests ERA consistently discovers that the most effective strategies are built upon a robust foundation of historical averages and recent trends, which are then enhanced by more complex methods. Indeed, the most successful recombinations consistently fused different modeling paradigms: for instance, pairing the epidemiological CEPH-Rtrend_covid model with the statistical UMass-ar6_pooled model created a hybrid anchored in the theory of disease spread yet highly responsive to recent data trends, while pairing the powerful machine learning UMass-gbqr model with the stable CMU-climate_baseline provided a robust seasonal foundation that allowed the ML model to safely focus on learning short-term deviations. Finally, we verified the importance of using ERA, rather than just taking the best of 1000 solution attempts, for both epidemiological modeling and scRNA-seq batch integration (Table 1).
Table 1 | Performance comparison of ERA and Best-of-N on the scRNA-seq batch integration and epidemiological modeling tasks. Performance is measured on the validation set for each task. Bold entries indicate better performance. BoN, best-of-N=1000.

Model Gemini 2.5 Flash Mistral Medium Claude Sonnet 4.6 GPT-5 Gemini 3.1 Pro

Method
BoN ERA
BoN ERA
BoN ERA
BoN ERA
BoN ERA

Batch integration (higher better)
0.6306 0.6552
0.6129 0.6332
0.6502 0.6575
0.6740 0.6671
0.6461 0.6641

Epidemiology (lower better)
106.55 93.07
95.73 87.98
85.03 84.56
78.04 74.55
92.39 72.70

Time Series Forecasting: GIFT-Eval We next evaluated ERA using General Time Series Forecasting Model Evaluation (GIFT-Eval)19, a standard benchmark for time series forecasting. GIFT-Eval includes 28 datasets across seven diverse domains, with data frequencies ranging from seconds to years. It receives 4 new submissions per
9

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
month that span diverse methodologies including black-box deep learning methods and foundation models. Submissions are scored on official train/validation/test splits using a normalized Mean Absolute Scaled Error (MASE) metric, calculated relative to a seasonal naive baseline.
We applied ERA in two phases. We began with a per-dataset solution in which ERA discovers an independent solution for each dataset. The second unified solution created a single generalpurpose forecasting model using only basic libraries by hill-climbing against the average score for the entire GIFT-Eval.
Per-dataset solution Here we allowed ERA to use a full suite of Python libraries, including scikit-learn, statsmodels, and xgboost. ERA outperformed the entire May 18, 2025 leaderboard, which included foundation models, deep learning models, and standard time series methods (Supplementary Table S12). The discovered solutions showed strong convergence towards gradient boosting and ensemble/decomposition models (Supplementary Fig. S13).
Unified solution We wondered whether the code mutation system could create a unified, generalpurpose forecasting library from scratch, by hill climbing with a single code on the average MASE on the entire GIFT-Eval dataset. To manage the benchmark's diversity, we allowed the library to have an adaptive configuration system, whereby it could generate up to 8 preset hyperparameter configurations to adapt to the diversity of datasets, with a validation step selecting the best performing configuration for each dataset. As the search progressed, date and trend-related features often led to performance breakthroughs leading to a model that sequentially forecasts and subtracts individual time series components, including a base level, trend, seasonality, datetime-based features, and a final residual correction (Extended Data Fig. 8). The configurations (Supplementary Table S13) include date-specific features, including one that featurizes holidays in a specific set of countries ([`US', `DE', `CN', `GB', `CA', `AU']) . The resulting unified solution was highly competitive on the May 2025 leaderboard (Supplementary Table S12).
Other Problems: Geospatial Analysis, Neuroscience and Numerical Analysis
We also evaluated ERA on problems from three additional distinct domains: geospatial semantic segmentation, vertebrate neural activity forecasting, and numerical analysis (Supplementary Notes). ERA achieved expert-level performance in each case (Supplementary Figs. S14ŁS20, Supplementary Table S14).
Discussion
Our work introduces ERA, an AI-based system that drives a Tree Search (TS) with a Large Language Model (LLM) to systematically create and improve software for scientific tasks. By defining the problem of creating scientific software as a search for a program whose output maximizes a quality score, we convert software creation into a "scorable task", producing empirical software. ERA is novel in its LLM-driven rewriting approach, which allows for the flexible integration of domain knowledge and external research ideas. The ability of frontier LLMs to closely follow instructions enables efficient exploration of research ideas. ERA builds upon ideas from several distinct but related areas of research: Genetic Programming, Generative Programming, the application of LLMs to code, Automated Machine Learning (AutoML), Combining LLMs and Search, and agents for scientific discovery.
Genetic Programming -- Genetic Programming (GP) provides a foundation to our work. In GP, a population of programs is iteratively improved using evolutionary principles like selection, crossover,
10

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
and mutation. The fitness of each program is determined by a "fitness function," which is directly analogous to our "quality score"36. While GP has been successful, it traditionally relies on random mutations and structured recombination of code fragments (e.g., swapping sub-trees in an abstract syntax tree). Prior to the widespread adoption of large language models, GP systems successfully incorporated human expertise by restricting the search space using formal grammars or leveraging structural code metrics to bias the evolutionary search37. A key difference in ERA is the use of an LLM to perform intelligent, semantic-aware "mutations" by rewriting the code, which can produce more complex and meaningful variations than the random changes typical in GP.
Generative Programming -- ERA can be viewed as a modern AI-driven realization of traditional generative programming, where, a developer creates a program generator (using techniques like templates, domain-specific languages38, or metaprogramming) that produces tailored source code for a family of related problems39. In contrast, we use an LLM guided by a tree search as the generative engine. This approach offers greater flexibility, allowing ERA to synthesize novel programs by exploring a vast solution space and integrating diverse domain knowledge in ways not easily achievable with more template-based methods.
LLMs for Code Generation -- The advent of large language models pre-trained on vast code corpora has revolutionized code generation. Systems like AlphaCode40 and OpenAI Codex41 have demonstrated the ability to generate correct and complex code from natural language descriptions. These systems are typically used for "one-shot" generation from a prompt. Our approach differs by using the LLM in an iterative refinement loop. Instead of generating code from scratch, our LLM rewrites existing software candidates, guided by a search algorithm (TS) that uses the quality score as a signal.
AutoML -- AutoML systems aim to automate the process of building machine learning pipelines by searching for optimal model architectures and hyperparameters. The goal is to maximize a performance metric (e.g., accuracy, F1-score) on a validation dataset42, which fits our definition of a scorable task. While AutoML focuses specifically on finding the best model within a fixed set of ML frameworks, ERA is more general. It can rewrite any software, including pre-processing steps, complex simulations, mathematical heuristics, and other areas that fall outside the typical scope of AutoML.
Combining LLMs and Search -- The most closely related work involves combining LLMs with search algorithms to overcome the limitations of one-shot generation. A rapidly growing body of literature formulates automated algorithm design as an Evolutionary Algorithm (EA)43,44. FunSearch uses an LLM to search for new mathematical discoveries by pairing a LLM suggesting code improvements with an automated evaluator15. Very recently, agentic frameworks like AlphaEvolve14 have expanded these evolutionary coding loops towards needle-in-the-haystack discovery problems, similar in spirit to the tree search algorithms explored here, albeit without idea exploration required for scientific problem solving.
Agents for science problems -- This sub-field has seen remarkable performance from highly specialized systems, with agents focusing on problems ranging from data science45 to computational biology46. Instead of specializing in one domain, ERA demonstrates a general capability for empirical software optimization, achieving expert-level performance on public leaderboards and in academic literature across multiple fields.
To our knowledge, this is the first work demonstrating a system that beats human performance on a wide range of relevant and well-studied scientific problems. Across different fields, by prompting with the method description from cutting edge papers, ERA not only produces code that follows the methods of the paper but often has superior results.
11

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
We would like to emphasize the critical distinction between optimizing empirical predictive models and performing genuine scientific discovery, the latter of which requires reasoning about underlying theories, causal mechanisms, and mathematical frameworks. While the core problems evaluated in this paper primarily emphasize advanced empirical software engineering to allow for rigorous, automated scoring, our underlying system goes well beyond this, towards scientific discovery (Supplementary Notes).
The ability of LLM-based systems to autonomously produce expert-level empirical software carries broader safety risks, particularly when applied to domains that could directly impact human well-being. By automating complex engineering workflows, our system significantly lowers the technical expertise required to execute sophisticated computational tasks. While this democratization accelerates beneficial scientific discovery, it concurrently lowers the barrier to entry for deploying advanced models in sensitive or potentially dangerous domains. This phenomenon represents a broader, systemic risk associated with the combination of large-scale inference-time compute and exponentially increasing foundation model quality.
To summarize, ERA combines a code mutation system based on Tree Search2 with the ability to integrate complex research ideas. Such research ideas could come from the published literature, from research agents (e.g.31,32) or from combining previous ideas and solutions that the LLM has found itself. Because ERA creates code that can follow a specific idea, it can search over externally-supplied research ideas. ERA created 40 methods that beat the best known method for scRNA-seq batch integration and 14 methods that outperformed the CDC ensemble for epidemiological prediction. Additionally, ERA achieved expert-level performance on geospatial reasoning, neural activity prediction and algorithms for computational mathematics and a novel rule-based strategy for time series prediction.
Trial and error is essential to scientific progress, both for humans and for the automated approaches we outline here. ERA generates expert-level solutions extraordinarily quickly, reducing exploration of a set of ideas from weeks or months, to hours or days. Accelerating research in this way has profound consequences for scientific advancement. Based on this work, we believe that progress in scientific fields where solutions can be scored by machines is on the precipice of a significant acceleration.
12

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Methods

Code mutation system

We prompt an LLM providing a description, the evaluation metric and the relevant data. The LLM produces Python code, which is then executed and scored on a sandbox. Searching over strategies dramatically increases performance: The system uses the score together with output logs and other information to hill climb towards a better score. We used a tree search (TS) strategy with an upper confidence bound (UCB) inspired by AlphaZero47. A critical difference from AlphaZero is that our problems don't allow exhaustive enumeration of all possible children of a node, so every node is a candidate for expansion. We therefore modify the UCB algorithm to count visits and compute mean values using the tree. However, when sampling a node to expand, we sample directly from the whole set instead of recursing from the root like AlphaZero. This makes our method closer to Flat UCB48 than any MCTS variant like AlphaZero.

We also note that the algorithm differs from traditional TS, in that the scoring of the nodes do not involve random rollouts (e.g. of a game) to estimate the value of a node. Yet there is still randomness for scoring each node, caused by the sampling of the LLM itself, which produces a distribution of different codes (scores) for each fixed prompt.

We use a PUCT tree search algorithm to explore the space of code2. The PUCT (Predictor +

Upper Confidence bound applied to Trees) algorithm is described in Algorithm 1. For tree , and

executed

candidate

,

we

define

the

flat

prior

 ()

=

1 |

|

.

To

make

it

easier

to

tune

the

exploration

constant  across tasks, we convert task-specific scores TaskScore() to rank scores RankScore ()

in

the

PUCT

formula.

We

define

RankScore ()

=

Rank | |

() -1

-1

,

when

| |

>

1,

and

1

otherwise,

where

Rank () gives ascending-order ranks to the candidates.

To select the next node for expansion, the algorithm balances exploitation of high-scoring solutions with exploration of the search space by computing a PUCT-inspired (Polynomial Upper Confidence Trees) acquisition score for each node :

PUCT =  + puct Ę ()

(1)

where puct is the exploration constant and () is an exploration term based on the node's visit count relative to the total number of visits across the entire tree. We tuned puct on the Kaggle benchmark to maximize performance, finding puct = 1 works well. The node with the globally maximum PUCT score is selected. The language model then generates a single novel child solution conditioned on this parent's code and score. The new code is executed, assigned an empirical score, and appended to the search tree, followed by a backpropagation of the visit count to its ancestors. This global, flat-tree structure allows the system to seamlessly backtrack and branch from any historical node if the current optimization path plateaus.

We emphasize that in our algorithm mutations occur at the code level Ł ideas are part of prompts that produce code, that is then scored and iterated upon. With increasing nodes in the tree, the score saturates after 300-1000 nodes (See Breakthrough plots in Supplementary Figures). We search over ideas by combining different tree searches with different prompts together.

Finally, the implementation we outline here was chosen for optimal performance on the Kaggle Benchmark. Many alternatives were explored, including different agentic configurations and the simple implementation outlined here had the highest overall performance across the benchmark. All experiments in this paper were carried out with Gemini 2.5 Flash, with the improvement with Gemini 2.5 Pro modest.

It is useful to explicitly contrast this algorithm with standard heuristic search algorithms. Our

13

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Algorithm 1 UCB tree search (PUCT)

Input: GenerateAndExecute(), TaskScore() to define rank scores RankScore (), exploration constant , and a root node .

1:   {}

 Initialize the tree with a root node.

2:  ()  1

3: for all iterations do

4:

    ()

5: Select   argmax

score



RankScore

()

+

 

()

 1+ ()

 Get total visits across all nodes  Select node with highest PUCT

6:   GenerateAndExecute()

 Expand the selected node and Execute

7:     {}

8:  ()  1 9: for all ancestors  of  (excluding ) do

 Backpropagate results

10:

 ()   () + 1

11: end for

12: end for

13: return argmax TaskScore()

 Best solution found

approach does not rely on beam search (which aggressively prunes unselected candidates at each depth layer) nor a (1 + ) evolution strategy (which maintains only the most recent generation and discards historical states).
Similarly, our system differs from emergent efforts to incorporate LLMs into GPs43,44,49Ł51.
More recently, agentic AutoML frameworks encompass automated feature engineering, metalearning, dynamic pipeline construction, and multi-objective optimization52, including agentic systems53,54, which have shown more impressive performance55.

Adding research ideas to the code mutation system
When an expert solves difficult scientific problems, they often search for prior work for ideas. Prior work could be sourced from highly cited papers, specialized textbooks, or search engines. The search for prior work can also be powered by LLMs31,32,56Ł60.
We emulate the expert behavior by injecting instructions for carrying out research ideas into the prompt of our code mutation system (Fig. 1). We applied the research instruction injection for scRNA-seq batch integration, COVID prediction, segmenting remote sensing images, and whole-brain neural activity prediction. While the most successful outcomes used top methods from the literature, we also used two LLM driven search strategies: Deep Research from Gemini 2.5 Flash31 and AI co-scientist 32 .
For running these searches, we provided the tools with background information from the main problem description, and instructed the models to create distinct ideas (Supplementary Table S15). After manually filtering proposals and removing one proposed scRNA-seq batch integration method, we prompted Gemini to format the ideas into a structure consistent with our baseline method descriptions (Supplementary Table S16). Finally, we ran ERA on these ideas to create empirical codes that could be scored.

14

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
ERA versus best-of-N
We use  = 128 ERA search nodes and compare the performance of Gemini 2.5 Flash, Mistral Medium, Claude Sonnet 4.6, GPT-5, and Gemini 3.1 Pro on the scRNA-seq batch integration task and an epidemiological flu forecasting task. This explores a range of models that were contemporaneous with the core model used in this paper (Gemini 2.5 Flash) while also using Gemini 3.1 Pro as a state-of-the-art model at the time of paper publication. The scores use the same scoring rules as in all other experiments: for the epidemiological forecasting task it is the Weighted Interval Score evaluated over a rolling evaluation window, while for scRNA-seq batch integration it is the average of metrics measuring preservation of biological information while eliminating batch effects, both measured on the validation set. Note that significant improvements in batch integration happen with much smaller change in validation scores than in epidemiological forecasting. We present here the best performance over 3 different experiments (with both Best-of-N and ERA). Typical variation in performance is of order 0.01 for batch integration and (1) for epidemiological forecasting, with some model dependence. For example, GPT-5 has much more experiment-to-experiment variability than other models.
We note that ERA explores the solution space more efficiently than Best-of-N, and outperforms Bestof-N for all models and problems, with the exception of GPT-5's performance on batch integration. On the batch integration problem, GPT-5's one shot performance is sufficiently good that this distinction isn't important. Indeed we expect that as frontier models improve, tasks that were once difficult will saturate. Tree search is useful for pushing model performance on difficult tasks.
Recombination experiments
For both scRNA-seq batch integration problem and COVID-19 forecasting, we combined ideas from methods already generated using tree search. For the scRNA-seq batch integration problem, we used the first versions of our 11 baseline methods. For the COVID-19 prediction problem, we used the eight replications of models submitted to CovidHub. We first took the top-performing node from each tree search run seeded with one of these methods, based on its score on the validation set (for COVID-19 prediction, this included six weeks of reference dates from 2025-02-22 to 2025-03-29). Then, for every pair of these methods, we prompted Gemini 2.5 Flash to compare the two methods and explain the core technical similarities and differences between the two parent models using a consistent prompt (Supplementary Table S7). The explanatory response was then added to the the prompt, along with a statement instructing tree search to recombine the ideas by combining the best parts of both approaches (Supplementary Table S17). Subsequently, we ran ERA to generate new hybrid strategies. This process yielded 55 recombined methods for the scRNA-seq batch integration problem, and 28 for the COVID-19 prediction problem (evaluated on the three-week holdout set 2025-04-05 to 2025-04-19, see Fig. 3e).
Our method for recombination differs from previous efforts where the LLM acts as a mutation and crossover operator49Ł51,61Ł64. Our approach to recombining expert ideas is conceptually related to evolutionary methods such as RHEA, with the comparative advantage that our tree search recombines expert ideas directly in conceptual space via LLM prompts rather than solely in distilled model space65.
Gemini embeddings
For each tree search implementation, we input the code snippets to the Gemini text embedding model66, and the resulting 3,072-dimensional output vectors served as the semantic representations of their respective implementations.
15

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
scRNA-seq batch integration
For all scRNA-seq experiments, we ran tree search with 500 nodes. Each experiment took roughly seven hours to execute on our infrastructure.
Dataset We sourced a dataset from CZ CELLxGENE Discover25 to use for hill climbing with tree search. To identify datasets distinct from the six OpenProblems.bio test datasets but that have similar characteristics, we filtered to datasets that contain only healthy human cells, with primary cell count  2,000, at least 10 unique cell types, at least seven unique donor ids (i.e. number of batches), and contain at least two unique assays that are also present in the OpenProblems.bio datasets. This filtering process identified 22 candidate datasets. After manually investigating the candidate datasets, we selected the dataset 364bd0c7-f7fd-48ed-99c1-ae26872b1042 version ffdaa1f0-b1d1-4135-8774-9fed7bf039ba 17 .
Within the selected dataset, we applied quality control metrics and data processing steps identical to the processing performed on the OpenProblems.bio datasets67,68, yielding a processed dataset with normalized expression values, highly variable genes, principal components, and -nearest neighbors all computed. For computational efficiency, we randomly selected two disjoint subsets of  = 20, 000 cells each, attempting to match (batch, cell type) distributions of the entire processed dataset. The "train" dataset was used for model training and selection of the highest-performing node in a single tree search. The "validation" dataset was used to select the best tree search for methods in which we ran multiple replicates of the same algorithm (Supplementary Fig. S1).
Evaluating scRNA-seq Batch Integration on the OpenProblems.bio Benchmark We downloaded the OpenProblems v2.0.0 input and solution data from s3://openproblems-data/resources/ task_batch_integration/datasets/cellxgene_census/ and raw performance metrics from s3:// openproblems-data/resources/task_batch_integration/results/run_2025-01-23_18-03-16/score_ uns.yaml. We computed control-scaled metric results identically to the published OpenProblems results. Briefly, for each (dataset, metric), lower and upper bounds on raw scores are defined as the minimum and maximum values achieved by the seven "control" methods. Raw values were linearly scaled between those extrema and clamped to be in [0, 1]. Overall score was computed as the arithmetic mean over all 78 measurements (13 metrics computed for each of 6 datasets) with NaN values replaced by 0 (i.e., failure to compute a metric causes it to be considered the worst possible score).
Replication of Existing Methods for Batch Integration The OpenProblems.bio benchmark profiles the performance of several state-of-the-art existing methods. As of July 11, 2025 there were 19 different methods. Three methods have implementations in both R and Python: LIGER and pyliger, Harmony and Harmonypy, and batchelor mnnCorrect and mnnpy. After grouping reimplementations of the same method, there are 16 separate research ideas. From this list, we excluded all six foundation model methods (UCE, SCimilarity, scGPT (zero shot), scGPT (fine-tuned), Geneformer, and scPRINT) because they perform very poorly on the benchmark and use a much larger training set. For example, only a single foundation model (UCE) performs better than the negative control of "No integration" which simply performs PCA on the dataset. We further excluded scANVI, which is a modification of scVI that is trained using cell type information. Since cell type information is used to define the metrics, this represents data leakage and consequently we consider scANVI a control method. This resulted in nine existing different research methods to optimize with tree search.
For each of the nine existing methods, we obtained the manuscript PDF corresponding to the
16

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
method. To obtain a short method description from the manuscript, we used Gemini 2.5 Pro Thinking to summarize the paper (prompt in Supplementary Table S18, example output in Supplementary Table S19). For batchelor fastMNN, which is a faster implementation of batchelor mnnCorrect, there is no separate publication and thus we provided the paper PDF of batchelor mnnCorrect as well as the docstring corresponding to batchelor fastMNN from https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/ batchelor/man/fastMNN.html (Details section) with a slightly adjusted prompt. Finally, the method summary is added to the tree search prompt, and is used to come up with better code solutions given the method summary.
For each of the nine methods, we ran three replicates of tree search. For Fig. 2, we selected the replicate that had the best performance based on the validation set score. We show the performance of all replicates in Extended Data Fig. 1. Code for the best performing method is in Supplementary Table S6.
Hyperparameters To determine optimal hyperparameters for each base method, we employed Optuna, an automated hyperparameter optimization framework69. Search spaces were defined across integer, float, and categorical parameter types by experts. The optimization process ran for a total of five times the number of parameters. In each trial, a model was trained using a sampled parameter set and evaluated based on a performance metric that Optuna's Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) sampler aimed to maximize. All hyperparameter optimization was conducted solely on the training dataset. The best identified hyperparameter set was then utilized to train the final base methods and evaluate them on the held-out OpenProblems dataset.
COVID-19 prediction
Dataset Our primary data source was historical confirmed COVID-19 hospital admissions, which corresponds to the target variable specified by CovidHub. These data are published weekly by the CDC within the National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN) Hospital Respiratory Data (HRD) dataset70. Preprocessing was kept minimalŁmissing values in the dataset were replaced by zeros to enable tree search to find executable code with the criterion score (WIS). The only additional data source used to augment the target for our model was static jurisdiction-specific population values from the CovidHub GitHub Repository18. For comparing model performance in Fig. 3c, we use all of the models submitted to Forecast Hub which make predictions at a state by state level and have forecasts for at least 75 percent of the season and time horizons. We ran tree search with 2000 nodes for each reported run. We note that we use available as of 2025-05-01 for the entire retrospective season, thus ignoring potential differences in data available at the date of forecast.
Replication of existing COVID-19 prediction models We selected eight models for replication from those that had submitted to CovidHub based on the following inclusion criteria: (1) The method must be reproducible solely using historical COVID-19 hospitalization data, without reliance on external predictor variables, (2) The model submission must include predictions across all specified time horizons, and (3) Model submissions must be available for over three months (12 weeks) to enable meaningful comparison. Three models were excluded for failing these criteria: two were ensembles of external forecasts, and one relied entirely on additional data. An additional five models were excluded because they did not provide predictions for all forecast horizons. These five models originated from the same forecasting team. As all our analysis involves aggregating model performance across horizons, we have excluded these five models from all comparisons. Overall this gave a selection of eight models for replication.
17

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
To instruct the search algorithm, we provided the method descriptions from the original authors' official submission metadata. For example, the metadata for the UMASS-arc6-pooled model states: "AR(6) model after fourth root data transform. AR coefficients are shared across all locations. A separate variance parameter is estimated for each location." We integrated these concise descriptions directly into the tree search prompt as part of the model directions, transforming them into instructions by prepending `Use a/an' (see Methods, Supplementary Table S10).
GIFT-Eval benchmark
We applied our tree search methodology to the General Time Series Forecasting Model Evaluation (GIFT-Eval) benchmark19. The search begins from a root node defined by an initial code template and proceeds via hill climbing, where new candidate solutions are generated and evaluated against the GIFT-Eval validation folds. At the end of a tree search, we evaluated the solution on the held-out test set using MASE point forecast as the scoring metric. Our results are based on a 5/18/2025 snapshot of the dataset, official leaderboard and scoring, all of which have been updated since. See Supplementary Table S12 for a complete snapshot of the leaderboard.
We remark that our snapshotting to a fixed date ensures stability. The GIFT-Eval protocols underwent significant structural changes after our experiments concluded, including major scoring/dataset corrections on July 24, 2025, and the introduction of an "Agentic" category on August 5, 2025. Later updates on August 25 redefined "Zero-shot" to account for widespread test data leakage in foundation models using the large pre-train dataset (Note that our method does not use the large pre-training data). To avoid unsound comparisons against baselines developed under these revised protocols, we deliberately chose not to submit to the live public leaderboard, restricting our comparison to the May 18th snapshot to ensure a valid, stable baseline. We also note that Gemini models driving our Tree Search have evolved significantly since our experiments.
We adhered to the benchmark's framework, utilizing the official dataset source from Hugging Face, its pre-defined training, validation, and test splits, as well as the scoring and evaluation code commonly used in the existing submission notebooks.
Per-dataset Solution We conducted separate tree searches for 92 of the 97 GIFT-Eval datasets, excluding the five largest due to computational constraints; for these, the naive baseline score was used in order to produce the aggregated leaderboard score. For each dataset, we used a search of 300 nodes, with the system permitted to use a broad suite of machine learning libraries, including scikit-learn, XGBoost, and statsmodels. Supplementary Fig. S13 shows an analysis of the types of models used across the 92 different solutions.
Unified Solution Here, we created a single, unified forecasting library that could generalize across all 97 datasets. We used a tree search of over 1,000 nodes, guided by the geometric mean of the normalized MASE scores across all datasets, providing a single objective function to optimize. To force the model to reason from first principles, its access was restricted to basic libraries (numpy, pandas, and holidays).
The resulting solution consists of two components: a single forecasting library and a list of eight preset configurations. For each dataset, the best-performing configuration is identified on the validation set. This selected configuration is then used with the unified library to produce the final forecast on the test set, allowing the model to adapt its strategy without seeing test data.
The final solution was developed iteratively. An initial search yielded a base model with a MASE of 0.82. A key breakthrough occurred in a subsequent run when the search space was expanded to ten configurations and the system was advised to use the holidays library, which improved the MASE
18

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
to 0.77 (Extended Data Fig. 8). A final 500 node refinement run pruned the configurations to an optimized set of eight, achieving the final MASE of 0.734.
The final solution sequentially models and removes fundamental components of the series, with the final forecast being the sum of the individual component forecasts. This approach allows the model to be highly configurable while systematically accounting for different sources of variation in the data. This process is outlined with the following steps:
1. Preprocessing: The input series first undergoes basic cleaning, including median imputation for any missing values. An optional log-transform (log1p) can be applied to stabilize variance in series with exponential growth patterns.
2. Base/Level Component: A base level is established using simple but robust methods like a seasonal naive forecast or a rolling median of recent data points. This component captures the basic magnitude of the series.
3. Trend Component: The residuals from the base component are then modeled to capture linear or polynomial trends. This step includes a damping_factor to prevent unrealistic long-term extrapolation by gradually flattening the trend.
4. Seasonality Component: The residuals from the trend component are analyzed to model cyclical patterns (e.g., weekly, yearly). The model identifies the cycle length and forecasts seasonality by averaging values at the same point in the cycle (e.g., the average value for all Mondays).
5. Datetime and Holiday Features: To capture special events and non-seasonal cycles, features are extracted from the timestamp (e.g., dayofweek, is_holiday_flag). The model calculates the median effect of each feature category from the remaining residuals and adds it to the forecast.
6. Residual Correction: As a final step, a correction is made by modeling the median of the most recent unexplained errors. This autoregressive-like step helps correct for short-term biases in the model. A decay_factor fades its impact over the forecast horizon.
To apply the unified solution to a new dataset, one would first split the historical data into training and validation sets. Using the library's adaptive configuration system, one can then find a suitable forecasting strategy by evaluating the eight preset configurations on the validation data to select the best-performing one. This provides a strong, data-driven starting point that can be used directly. For more specialized applications, one can also create a custom configuration, allowing for manual refinement of the model's components and making the library both powerful out-of-the-box and flexible enough for expert tuning.
19

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
References
[1] Hannay, J. E. et al. How do scientists develop and use scientific software? In 2009 ICSE Workshop on Software Engineering for Computational Science and Engineering, 1Ł8 (IEEE, 2009).
[2] Silver, D. et al. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature 529, 484Ł489 (2016).
[3] Hohenberg, P. & Kohn, W. Inhomogeneous electron gas. Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964).
[4] Kohn, W. & Sham, L. J. Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation effects. Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).
[5] Warshel, A. & Levitt, M. Theoretical studies of enzymic reactions: dielectric, electrostatic and steric stabilization of the carbonium ion in the reaction of lysozyme. J. Mol. Biol. 103, 227Ł249 (1976).
[6] Jumper, J. et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature 596, 583Ł589 (2021).
[7] Baek, M. et al. Accurate prediction of protein structures and interactions using a three-track neural network. Science 373, 871Ł876 (2021).
[8] Hourdin, F. et al. The art and science of climate model tuning. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 98, 589Ł602 (2017).
[9] Anderson Jr., J. Basic philosophy of CFD. In Computational Fluid Dynamics, 3Ł14 (Springer, 2009).
[10] Silver, N. The signal and the noise: why so many predictions fail-but some don't (Penguin, 2012).
[11] Farmer, J. D. Making sense of chaos: a better economics for a better world (Yale Univ. Press, 2024).
[12] Sculley, D. et al. Hidden technical debt in machine learning systems. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 28 (2015).
[13] Jiang, Z. et al. AIDE: AI-driven exploration in the space of code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13138 (2025).
[14] Novikov, A. et al. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131 (2025).
[15] Romera-Paredes, B. et al. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models. Nature 625, 468Ł475 (2024).
[16] Hu, S., Lu, C. & Clune, J. Automated design of agentic systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08435 (2024).
[17] Xu, C. et al. Automatic cell-type harmonization and integration across Human Cell Atlas datasets. Cell 186, 5876Ł5891.e20 (2023).
[18] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. COVID-19 forecast hub (2025). https://github. com/cdcgov/covid19-forecast-hub?tab=readme-ov-file.
[19] Aksu, T. et al. GIFT-Eval: a benchmark for general time series forecasting model evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10393 (2024). https://huggingface.co/spaces/Salesforce/GIFT-Eval.
20

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
[20] Shao, Z., Yang, K. & Zhou, W. Performance evaluation of single-label and multi-label remote sensing image retrieval using a dense labeling dataset. Remote Sens. 10, 964 (2018).
[21] Lueckmann, J.-M. et al. ZAPBench: a benchmark for whole-brain activity prediction in zebrafish. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.02618 (2025).
[22] Jovic, D. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing technologies and applications: a brief overview. Clin. and Transl. Med. 12, e694 (2022).
[23] Svensson, V., Vento-Tormo, R. & Teichmann, S. A. Exponential scaling of single-cell RNA-seq in the past decade. Nat. Protoc. 13, 599Ł604 (2018).
[24] Regev, A. et al. The Human Cell Atlas. eLife 6, e27041 (2017).
[25] CZI Cell Science Program et al. CZ CELLxGENE Discover: a single-cell data platform for scalable exploration, analysis and modeling of aggregated data. Nucleic Acids Res. 53, D886ŁD900 (2025).
[26] Stuart, T. & Satija, R. Integrative single-cell analysis. Nat. Rev. Genet. 20, 257Ł272 (2019).
[27] Zappia, L., Phipson, B. & Oshlack, A. Exploring the single-cell RNA-seq analysis landscape with the scRNA-tools database. PLoS Comput. Biol. 14, e1006245 (2018).
[28] Tran, H. T. N. et al. A benchmark of batch-effect correction methods for single-cell RNA sequencing data. Genome Biol. 21, 1Ł32 (2020).
[29] Chazarra-Gil, R., van Dongen, S., Kiselev, V. Y. & Hemberg, M. Flexible comparison of batch correction methods for single-cell RNA-seq using BatchBench. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, e42 (2021).
[30] Luecken, M. D. et al. Defining and benchmarking open problems in single-cell analysis. Nat. Biotechnol. 43, 1035Ł1040 (2025).
[31] Google. Gemini Deep Research (2025). https://gemini.google/overview/deep-research/ ?hl=en.
[32] Gottweis, J. et al. Towards an AI co-scientist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18864 (2025).
[33] Johnson, W. E., Li, C. & Rabinovic, A. Adjusting batch effects in microarray expression data using empirical Bayes methods. Biostatistics 8, 118Ł127 (2007).
[34] Polaski, K. et al. BBKNN: fast batch alignment of single cell transcriptomes. Bioinformatics 36, 964Ł965 (2019).
[35] Chandrashekar, A. et al. TabVI: leveraging lightweight transformer architectures to learn biologically meaningful cellular representations. bioRxiv 2025Ł02 (2025).
[36] Koza, J. R. Genetic programming as a means for programming computers by natural selection. Stat. Comput. 4, 87Ł112 (1994).
[37] Schweim, D., Hemberg, E., Sobania, D., O'Reilly, U.-M. & Rothlauf, F. Using knowledge of human-generated code to bias the search in program synthesis with grammatical evolution. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion, 331Ł332 (2021).
[38] Mernik, M., Heering, J. & Sloane, A. M. When and how to develop domain-specific languages. ACM computing surveys (CSUR) 37, 316Ł344 (2005).
21

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
[39] Czarnecki, K. Generative programming: Methods, techniques, and applications tutorial abstract. In International Conference on Software Reuse, 351Ł352 (Springer, 2002).
[40] Li, Y. et al. Competition-level code generation with AlphaCode. Science 378, 1092Ł1097 (2022).
[41] Chen, M. et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
[42] Hutter, F., Kotthoff, L. & Vanschoren, J. Automated machine learning: methods, systems, challenges (Springer Nature, 2019).
[43] Wu, X., Wu, S.-h., Wu, J., Feng, L. & Tan, K. C. Evolutionary computation in the era of large language model: survey and roadmap. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. (2024).
[44] Ma, Z., Guo, H., Gong, Y., Zhang, J. & Tan, K. Toward automated algorithm design: A survey and practical guide to meta-black-box-optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation (2025).
[45] Ifargan, T., Hafner, L., Kern, M., Alcalay, O. & Kishony, R. Autonomous LLM-driven research-- from data to human-verifiable research papers. NEJM AI 2, AIoa2400555 (2024).
[46] Xiao, Y. et al. CellAgent: An LLM-driven multi-agent framework for automated single-cell data analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.09811 (2024).
[47] Silver, D. et al. Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge. Nature 550, 354Ł359 (2017).
[48] Coquelin, P.-A. & Munos, R. Bandit algorithms for tree search. arXiv preprint cs/0703062 (2007).
[49] Hemberg, E., Moskal, S. & O'Reilly, U.-M. Evolving code with a large language model. Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines 25, 21 (2024).
[50] Meyerson, E. et al. Language model crossover: Variation through few-shot prompting. ACM Transactions on Evolutionary Learning 4, 1Ł40 (2024).
[51] Grishina, A., Liventsev, V., Hõrmõ, A. & Moonen, L. Fully autonomous programming using iterative multi-agent debugging with large language models. ACM Transactions on Evolutionary Learning 5, 1Ł37 (2025).
[52] He, X., Zhao, K. & Chu, X. Automl: A survey of the state-of-the-art. Knowledge-Based Systems 212, 106622 (2021).
[53] Fang, Y. et al. MLZero: A multi-agent system for end-to-end machine learning automation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13941 (2024).
[54] Li, Z., Zang, Q., Ma, D. et al. AutoKaggle: A multi-agent framework for autonomous data science competitions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20424 (2024).
[55] Grosnit, A. et al. Agent K v1.0: End-to-end autonomous data science agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02598 (2024).
[56] Perplexity. Perplexity Deep Research (2025). https://www.perplexity.ai/hub/blog/ introducing-perplexity-deep-research.
22

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
[57] Du, M., Xu, B., Zhu, C., Wang, X. & Mao, Z. DeepResearch Bench: a comprehensive benchmark for deep research agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11763 (2025).
[58] Coelho, J. et al. DeepResearchGym: A free, transparent, and reproducible evaluation sandbox for deep research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19253 (2025).
[59] Xu, R. & Peng, J. A comprehensive survey of deep research: Systems, methodologies, and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12594 (2025).
[60] Baek, J., Jauhar, S. K., Cucerzan, S. & Hwang, S. J. ResearchAgent: iterative research idea generation over scientific literature with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07738 (2024).
[61] Lehman, J. et al. Evolution through large models. In Handbook of evolutionary machine learning, 331Ł366 (Springer, 2023).
[62] van Stein, N. & Bõck, T. Llamea: A large language model evolutionary algorithm for automatically generating metaheuristics. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation (2024).
[63] Liu, F. et al. Evolution of heuristics: towards efficient automatic algorithm design using large language model. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (2024).
[64] Ye, H., Wang, J., Cao, Z., Wang, H. & Song, G. ReEvo: Large language models as hyperheuristics with reflective evolution. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37, 43571Ł43608 (2024).
[65] Meyerson, E., Francon, O., Sargent, D., Hodjat, B. & Miikkulainen, R. Unlocking the potential of global human expertise. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37, 119227Ł119259 (2024).
[66] Lee, J. et al. Gemini Embedding: Generalizable embeddings from Gemini. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07891 (2025).
[67] Gigante, S., Cannoodt, R. et al. openproblems (2025). https://github.com/openproblems-bio/ openproblems.
[68] Cannoodt, R., Zappia, L., Burkhardt, D. et al. task_batch_integration (2025). https:// github.com/openproblems-bio/task_batch_integration.
[69] Akiba, T., Sano, S., Yanase, T., Ohta, T. & Koyama, M. Optuna: A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min. (2019).
[70] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Weekly Hospital Respiratory Data (HRD) Metrics by Jurisdiction (2024). https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/ Weekly-Hospital-Respiratory-Data-HRD-Metrics-by-Ju/mpgq-jmmr. Dataset ID: mpgqjmmr. Last updated: June 14, 2024.
[71] Yang, Y. & Newsam, S. Bag-of-visual-words and spatial extensions for land-use classification. In Proc. 18th SIGSPATIAL Int. Conf. on Adv. in Geogr. Inf. Syst., 270Ł279 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2010).
[72] Russakovsky, O. et al. ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 115, 211Ł252 (2015).
[73] Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Hinton, G. E. ImageNet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 25 (2012).
23

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
[74] Immer, A. et al. Forecasting whole-brain neuronal activity from volumetric video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.00073 (2025).
[75] Zeng, A., Chen, M., Zhang, L. & Xu, Q. Are transformers effective for time series forecasting? In Proc AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 37, 11121Ł11128 (2023).
[76] Das, A. et al. Long-term forecasting with TiDE: Time-series Dense Encoder. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. (2023).
[77] Chen, S.-A., Li, C.-L., Yoder, N., Arik, S. O. & Pfister, T. TSMixer: An All-MLP architecture for time series forecasting. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. (2023).
[78] Perez, E., Strub, F., De Vries, H., Dumoulin, V. & Courville, A. FiLM: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proc AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 32 (2018).
[79] Deistler, M. et al. Differentiable simulation enables large-scale training of detailed biophysical models of neural dynamics. bioRxiv 2024Ł08 (2024).
[80] Hodgkin, A. L. & Huxley, A. F. A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve. J. Physiol. 117, 500 (1952).
[81] Piessens, R., de Doncker-Kapenga, E., ▄berhuber, C. W. & Kahaner, D. QUADPACK: a subroutine package for automatic integration (Springer-Verlag, 1983).
[82] Gradshteyn, I. & Ryzhik, I. Table of integrals, series, and products, 8th edn (Academic Press, 1994).
[83] Meurer, A. et al. SymPy: symbolic computing in Python. PeerJ Comput. Sci. 3, e103 (2017).
[84] Brenner, M. P., Cohen-Addad, V. & Woodruff, D. Solving an open problem in theoretical physics using ai-assisted discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.04735 (2026).
[85] Lueckmann, J.-M., Jain, V. & Januszewski, M. Discovering mechanistic models of neural activity: System identification in an in silico zebrafish (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.04492. 2602.04492.
[86] McInnes, L., Healy, J. & Melville, J. UMAP: uniform manifold approximation and projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426 (2018).
[87] Ho, S. L. & Xie, M. The use of ARIMA models for reliability forecasting and analysis. Comput. Ind. Eng. 35, 213Ł216 (1998).
[88] Zhong, B., Du, J., Liu, M., Yang, A. & Wu, J. Region-enhancing network for semantic segmentation of remote-sensing imagery. Sensors 21 (2021).
[89] Zhang, Z., Liu, B. & Li, Y. FURSformer: semantic segmentation network for remote sensing images with fused heterogeneous features. Electronics 12 (2023).
[90] Atiampo, A. K. & Diķdiķ, G. H. F. New fusion approach of spatial and channel attention for semantic segmentation of very high spatial resolution remote sensing images. Open J. Appl. Sci. 14, 288Ł319 (2024).
[91] Sun, Y., Bi, F., Gao, Y., Chen, L. & Feng, S. A multi-attention UNet for semantic segmentation in remote sensing images. Symmetry 14, 906 (2022).
[92] Elgamily, K. M., Mohamed, M. A., Abou-Taleb, A. M. & Ata, M. M. A novel W13 deep CNN structure for improved semantic segmentation of multiple objects in remote sensing imagery. Neural Comput. Appl. 37, 5397Ł5427 (2025).
24

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Code Availability
A reference implementation of ERA is available at https://github.com/google-research/era. The best candidate solutions generated for each of the six scientific problems in this paper are publicly available at https://google-research.github.io/era, along with a user interface enabling examination of the full tree search data for a representative run for each of the six scientific problems. The interface allows inspecting the solution progression and breakthrough plot as the tree search proceeds and highlights code diffs.
Author Contributions Statement
Code Mutation System (E.A., A.B., G.C., M.C., H.C., P.N., D.S., J.T., S.V., M.P., J.K., P.R., J.W., L. W., S.M. and M.P.B.) Single Cell RNA-seq Batch Integration (A.Be., C.Y.M., C.H., Y.Z., M.P.B.) COVID Forecasting (Z.S., S.M., M.P., M.C., M.P.B.) Geospatial Analysis (R.J., Je.C., Q.Z., M.P.B.) ZAPBench (B.P.W., J-M.L, Q.Z.) GIFT-Eval (J.G., M.P.B.) Integrals (A.K., R.K., M.P.B.) User Interfaces (E.A., G.C., P.N., A.K., M.K., M.P.B., J-M.L., D.L., J.K., C.C., S.E.) Graphical Design (G.J.) Program Management (M.A., E.B.) Leadership (K.C., J.M., Y.M., J.C.P., L.D., S.M., M.P.B.)
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to our colleagues in Google Research and Google DeepMind for the incredible environment within which to do this work. We would like to specifically thank Niv Efron, Viren Jain, Anupam Pathak and Jamie Smith for many incisive discussions, Pablo Ruggia and Petkov Yotov for their help with LLM inference and scaling, and Nicholas Reich for comments on the manuscript.
Competing Interest Declaration
The authors affiliated with Google are employees of Google Inc. and hold Alphabet stock.
25

Overall score

Overall score

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Extended Data Figure Legends

a
0.6

Base method Tree search

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

BBKNN

ComBat Harmony

LIGER

No advice SCALEX Scanorama TabVI
Method

bfaastctMheNloNr mbnantcChoerrloerct

scVI

b
0.8

Base method Tree search

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

BBKNN

ComBat Harmony

LIGER

No advice SCALEX Scanorama TabVI
Method

bfaastctMheNloNr mbnantcChoerrloerct

scVI

Extended Data Fig. 1 | Relative performance of base methods and ERA replicates. a, Overall scores on the holdout OpenProblems datasets for all replicates of methods evaluated in Fig. 2. For tree search implementations, three replicates of the full process were performed. Dots indicate the overall score of the replicate on the holdout OpenProblems datasets. The bar shows the performance of the replicate with highest performance in the validation dataset (identical values to those shown in Fig. 2). The lowest performing tree search replicates for BBKNN, Scanorama, and TabVI only successfully computed 30, 57, and 45 of the 78 metrics, respectively. We note that failures due to out of memory or compute time issues were not explicitly selected against in our algorithm since all optimization was performed on datasets of only 20k cells. b, Average scores for each method when restricting to only (method, dataset, metric) combinations that have non-NaN values for the base method and all three tree search replicates. No advice and TabVI are absent since they have no base method comparator.

26

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

0.66

0.64 0.62 0.60

Node #63 Correct PCA embedding by aligning batch means.

Node #429 Replace PCA-based correction with ComBat batch correction.

Maximum Score

0.58 0.56 0.54

Node #29 Mean-center each principal component per batch and use as input for kNN.
Node #16 Optimize neighbor search using vectorized batch-wise queries.

100

200

300

400

500

Number of Nodes

#0 nan

#1

#2

-inf

0.532

#3 0.458

#4

#5

#6

#7

#8

#9

#10

0.192 -inf

-inf 0.405 -inf

-inf

-inf

#12

#27

#28

#21

#22

#24

#19

#16

#14

#26

#15

#11

#13

0.239 0.532 0.321 0.458 0.458 -inf 0.383 0.542 0.419 0.423 -inf 0.212 -inf

#20 0.391

#32

#29

-inf 0.629

#30

#31

#33

#34

#23

#25

#18

#17

0.616 0.541 0.577 0.57 0.419 0.418 -inf

-inf

#35 0.628

#36

#38

#37

#39

#40

#44

#41

0.623 0.62 0.536 0.536 0.539 0.577 0.577

#42 0.629

#43

#48

#49

0.62 0.624 0.619

#45 0.629

#46 0.624

#47 0.619

#50 0.609

#51 0.628

#54 0.624

#56 0.628

#59 0.611

#57 0.624

#52 0.628

#53 0.628

#58 0.629

#55 0.629

#60 0.624

#63 0.639

#61

#62

#67

#68

#64

#65

#66

#69

0.629 0.628 0.6 0.629 0.624 0.624 0.628 0.62

#73 0.639

#74 0.639

#75 0.639

#76 0.639

#77 0.642

#70 0.628

#71 0.629

#72 0.629

#78 0.628

#79 0.624

#81 0.541

#82 0.642

#84 0.639

#85 0.641

#83 0.639

#86 0.579

#87 0.644

#88 0.639

#89 0.639

#80 0.628

#90 0.642

#91 0.639

#93 0.639

#94 0.642

#92 0.592

#95 0.644

#97 0.632

#103 0.642

#96 0.639

#98 0.626

#99 0.639

#102 0.641

#100 0.639

#101 0.639

#104 0.638

#109 0.639

#105 0.644

#106 #107 #108 #110 #112 #113 #114 0.643 0.643 0.632 0.632 0.589 0.639 -inf

#111 0.639

#115 0.643

#118 0.644

#121 #123 #117 #120 #124 #116 #119

0.643 0.644 0.59

-inf 0.642 0.644 0.632

#122 0.644

#125 0.644

#127 0.644

#128 0.644

#130 0.643

#151 0.644

#152 0.643

#270 0.644

#271 0.644

#272 0.644

#273 0.644

#274 -inf

#275 0.643

#276 0.614

#277 0.644

#278 0.644

#281 0.643

#282 0.644

#283 0.643

#308 0.639

#309 0.521

#310 0.644

#311 0.639

#313 0.632

#314 0.644

#315 0.644

#316 0.632

#317 -inf

#318 0.596

#319 0.643

#320 -inf

#321 0.644

#322 -inf

#323 0.644

#324 0.623

#325 0.644

#326 0.644

#327 0.644

#328 0.643

#329 0.604

#330 0.643

#331 0.561

#332 0.643

#333 0.643

#335 0.644

#336 0.644

#337 0.643

#338 0.642

#339 0.642

#340 0.63

#341 0.644

#342 0.643

#343 0.632

#344 0.644

#345 0.643

#346 0.644

#347 0.644

#348 0.644

#349 0.643

#350 0.644

#351 0.612

#352 0.626

#353 0.644

#360 0.644

#361 0.639

#362 0.644

#363 0.602

#364 0.641

#366 0.643

#367 0.623

#368 0.643

#369 -inf

#370 0.644

#371 0.644

#372 0.542

#378 0.644

#379 0.644

#132 0.643

#126 0.644

#129 0.643

#131 0.644

#136 0.643

#175 0.643

#176 0.643

#225 0.644

#228 0.644

#240 0.643

#242 0.639

#377 0.644

#133 0.644

#135 0.643

#139 0.643

#146 0.644

#153 0.644

#137 0.614

#148 0.631

#162 0.643

#163 0.643

#166 0.644

#174 0.644

#179 0.644

#279 0.641

#280 0.644

#284 0.554

#285 0.643

#286 0.644

#287 0.644

#288 0.644

#289 0.643

#293 0.643

#294 0.643

#295 0.614

#298 0.644

#299 0.644

#302 0.644

#303 0.639

#307 0.643

#312 0.641

#334 0.643

#359 0.644

#391 0.644

#354 0.644

#355 0.574

#358 0.644

#356 0.643

#357 0.644

#373 0.643

#374 0.644

#375 0.644

#381 0.643

#384 0.644

#388 0.643

#380 0.632

#386 0.643

#389 0.644

#134 0.588

#138 0.643

#144 0.643

#149 0.639

#157 0.643

#178 0.588

#140 0.644

#141 0.644

#142 0.632

#145 0.644

#199 0.537

#224 0.643

#226 0.637

#236 0.641

#238 0.644

#241 0.644

#143 0.643

#155 0.643

#158 0.643

#159 0.644

#160 0.644

#165 0.644

#167 0.644

#161 0.644

#180 0.537

#181 0.643

#195 0.643

#290 0.632

#291 0.644

#292 0.644

#297 0.632

#296 0.643

#301 0.619

#398 0.643

#399 0.644

#401 0.643

#402 0.644

#405 0.549

#408 0.639

#412 0.643

#418 0.644

#419 0.643

#420 0.644

#423 0.643

#426 0.639

#365 0.643

#382 0.644

#383 0.644

#385 0.644

#387 0.644

#390 0.643

#147 0.644

#150 0.571

#154 0.613

#243 0.644

#244 0.632

#246 0.644

#247 0.644

#248 0.644

#249 0.644

#250 0.641

#251 0.644

#168 0.644

#169 0.643

#172 0.644

#173 0.644

#177 0.644

#170 0.643

#171 0.644

#300 0.643

#304 0.644

#305 0.639

#306 0.644

#428 -inf

429 0.654

#430 0.466

#431 0.643

#432 0.613

#433 0.641

#434 -inf

#435 0.634

#392 0.643

#393 0.644

#394 0.643

#395 0.641

#404 0.643

#406 0.644

#409 0.638

#413 0.643

#415 0.644

#421 0.644

#422 0.643

#427 0.632

#396 0.643

#397 0.643

#400 0.644

#403 0.644

#407 0.643

#156 0.644

#252 0.576

#253 0.621

#255 0.629

#256 -inf

#258 0.644

#259 0.639

#260 0.632

#262 0.612

#263 0.556

#264 0.628

#265 0.643

#266 0.537

#267 0.643

#268 0.632

#254 0.638

#261 0.641

#257 0.644

#183 0.644

#184 -inf

#186 0.643

#182 0.643

#185 0.644

#196 0.643

#187 0.643

#188 0.573

#189 0.644

#191 0.644

#193 0.644

#194 0.644

#197 0.643

#440 0.557

#441 0.649

#442 0.577

#443 0.652

#444 0.557

#447 0.649

#448 0.649

#449 0.602

#190 0.643

#192 0.644

#198 0.626

#202 0.643

#208 -inf

#227 0.643

#201 0.638

#203 0.575

#206 0.643

#209 0.644

#213 0.644

#215 0.643

#229 0.643

#239 0.644

#376 0.644

#204 0.557

#205 0.591

#207 0.56

#214 0.644

#220 0.564

#223 0.427

#452 0.553

#453 0.553

#456 0.552

#465 0.639

#470 0.649

#450 -inf

#451 0.593

#454 0.55

#457 0.642

#466 0.652

#469 0.546

#458 0.552

#461 -inf

#463 0.64

#467 -inf

#472 0.541

#459 0.552

#460 -inf

#462 0.649

#464 0.649

#468 0.653

#471 0.552

#200 0.644

#218 0.614

#219 0.632

#221 0.644

#230 0.643

#231 0.643

#232 0.627

#233 0.644

#234 0.618

#235 0.644

#237 0.637

#480 -inf

#483 0.65

#478 0.651

#482 0.645

#473 0.587

#474 0.649

#475 0.552

#476 0.649

#477 0.649

#479 0.554

#481 0.653

#484 0.654

#210 0.644

#211 0.624

#212 0.643

#216 0.643

#222 0.644

#245 0.643

#498 0.552

#503 0.555

#486 0.651

#487 -inf

#493 0.564

#488 0.642

#490 0.649

#496 0.555

#485 0.553

#489 0.649

#491 -inf

#492 0.533

#505 0.621

#494 0.545

#495 0.623

#497 0.642

#506 0.539

#499 0.602

#502 -inf

#507 0.579

#501 0.614

#500 0.649

#504 0.649

#416 0.644

#417 0.643

#424 0.644

#425 0.644

#436 0.644

#437 0.643

#438 0.644

#439 0.644

#445 0.643

#446 0.644

#455 0.637

#410 0.643

#411 0.644

#414 -inf

#164 0.643

#269 0.596

Extended Data Fig. 2 | Breakthrough plot and solution tree for the scRNA-seq batch integration task. Top Figure Breakthrough plot for the BBKNN (TS) tree search, showing the evolution of the maximum score as a function of the number of nodes. The green dots label places where the score abruptly increases due to an improvement in the code, and the label describes the change in the code that resulted in the score increase. Bottom Figure Structure of the tree for this same search. The color range consists of orange (lower scores) to green (higher scores) with the highest score denoted by a diamond node.

27

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

0.6

BBKNN implementation Tree search

Package

0.5

Overall score

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
Standardize ComBat+PCA
BBKNN

BBKNN (TS) ComBat+PCA+BBKNN Only BBKNN Standardize+ComBat+PCA ComBat+PCA BBKNN (TS) ComBat+PCA+BBKNN Only BBKNN Standardize+ComBat+PCA ComBat+PCA

Extended Data Fig. 3 | Ablation analysis of the top-performing BBKNN (TS) method. The BBKNN (TS) method performed standard linear expression scaling to 104 total counts followed by log1p transformation. It then applied three additional transforms: "Standardize" called sc.pp.scale to further scale the data to mean 0 and unit variance, "ComBat+PCA" called sc.pp.combat followed by sc.tl.pca to generate the expression embedding, and "BBKNN" applied an implementation of batch-balanced -nearest neighbors writted by ERA. Bars here show the overall performance in the OpenProblems datasets for ablations that include one or more of these components. For each ablation that includes the "BBKNN" component, comparison of the written BBKNN implementation ("Tree search") and the bbknn package implementation ("Package") is shown. Black dots show individual performance of three replicates of each method.

28

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Overall score

Overall score

Overall score

Overall score

Overall score

Overall score

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0 Harmony bfaastctMheNloNr Recomb 0.0 LIGER TabVI Recomb 0.0 mbnantcChoerrloerctNo advice Recomb 0.0 scVI

TabVI Recomb 0.0 scVI No advice Recomb

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0 ComBat TabVI Recomb 0.0 mbnantcChoerrloerct TabVI Recomb 0.0 ComBat mbnantcChoerrloerct Recomb 0.0 Harmony scVI Recomb 0.0 Harmony mbnantcChoerrloerct Recomb

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0 Harmony No advice Recomb 0.0

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

0.6

0.6

TabVI No advice Recomb 0.0 ComBat Harmony Recomb 0.0

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

0.6

0.6

LIGER No advice Recomb 0.0 Harmony LIGER Recomb

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0 ComBat No advice Recomb 0.0 ComBat LIGER Recomb 0.0

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

scVI bfaastctMheNloNr Recomb 0.0 bfaastctMheNloNr No advice Recomb 0.0 ComBat bfaastctMheNloNr Recomb

n=69/78

0.8

n=69/78

0.8

n=57/78

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0 bfaastctMheNloNr LIGER Recomb 0.0 bfaastctMheNloNr mbnantcChoerrloerct Recomb 0.0 LIGER mbnantcChoerrloerct Recomb 0.0 LIGER scVI Recomb 0.0 LIGER SCALEX Recomb

0.8

n=57/78

0.8

n=57/78

0.8

n=57/78

0.8

n=57/78

0.8

n=57/78

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0 SCALEX mbnantcChoerrloerct Recomb 0.0 SCALEX TabVI Recomb 0.0 Harmony SCALEX Recomb 0.0 SCALEX No advice Recomb 0.0 No advice Scanorama Recomb

0.8

n=57/78

0.8

n=57/78

0.8

n=57/78

0.8

n=57/78

0.8

n=57/78

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0 ComBat SCALEX Recomb 0.0 ComBat Scanorama Recomb 0.0 Harmony Scanorama Recomb 0.0

0.8

n=57/78

0.8

n=57/78

0.8

n=57/78

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

scVI Scanorama Recomb 0.0 SCALEX Scanorama Recomb

n=55/78

0.8

n=45/78

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0 LIGER Scanorama Recomb 0.0 bfaastctMheNloNr SCALEX Recomb 0.0 TabVI Scanorama Recomb 0.0 bfaastctMheNloNr Scanorama Recomb 0.0 mbnantcChoerrloerctScanorama Recomb

0.8

n=33/78

0.8

n=33/78

0.8

n=30/78

0.8

n=30/78

0.8

n=30/78

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0 ComBat scVI Recomb 0.0

0.8

n=30/78

0.8

0.6

0.6

scVI mbnantcChoerrloerct Recomb 0.0 BBKNN TabVI Recomb 0.0 LIGER BBKNN Recomb 0.0 SCALEX BBKNN Recomb

n=30/78

0.8

n=30/78

0.8

n=20/78

0.8

n=10/78

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0 Harmony BBKNN Recomb 0.0 BBKNN mbnantcChoerrloerct Recomb 0.0 ComBat BBKNN Recomb 0.0 bfaastctMheNloNr BBKNN Recomb 0.0 bfaastctMheNloNr TabVI Recomb

0.8

n=10/78

0.8

n=10/78

0.8

n=0/78

0.8

n=0/78

0.8

n=0/78

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0 BBKNN No advice Recomb 0.0 BBKNN Scanorama Recomb 0.0 Harmony TabVI Recomb 0.0 scVI BBKNN Recomb 0.0 scVI SCALEX Recomb

Overall score

Overall score

Overall score

Overall score

Overall score

Extended Data Fig. 4 | Comparison of tree search performance on base methods and their "recombination" over an intersection of successfully calculated metrics. We ran "recombination" experiments by seeding tree search with the top variants from two base method runs (see Methods). We compare the performance of two base methods and "recombination" on the OpenProblems test dataset for all 55 pairwise combinations of the 11 base methods. Since sometimes methods may fail getting a score for certain evaluation metrics due to errors like out of memory, we compare the performance on a subset of metrics that were successfully computed for all three methods. "n=X/78" on each subplot shows the number of successfully computed metrics, X, that we averaged over. For each subplot, we show the base methods on the left in light blue, and the recombination method on the right (labeled as "Recomb"), where a green bar means the recombination method outperforms both of its base methods, dark blue means the recombination method outperforms one of the base methods, and red means the recombination method does not outperform either of the base methods.

29

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Performance of the best retrospective COVID-19 hospitalization forecast replicates. This figure presents WIS by reference date for the single best-performing replicate of each validation window in our retrospective COVID-19 forecasting study. The best models are selected based on their performance on the validation dates. The plot shows how finding optimum models on a handful of validation dates (6 weeks) generalizes to the next two weeks of unseen reference dates.
30

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

0 -50 -100 -150 -200 -250

Node #349 Corrected inverse transformations and added robustness epsilon.
Node #152 Target transformed by population and log1p.
Node #97 Removed granular daily and day-of-week features.
Node #85 Refined lagged and rolling feature calculation for test data.
Node #38 Target transformation (log1p) applied to admissions.
Node #34 Improved lag feature generation for test data.
Node #28 Population-normalized, log-transformed target and robust lagged features.

Node #1875 Removed unstable XGBoost ensemble, retaining LightGBM only.
Node #1937 Winner

Maximum Score

-300

0

500

1000

1500

Number of Nodes

#0

#1

#2

-inf

-inf

-inf

#3

#5

-inf

-inf

#8

#9

#11

-332

-inf

-inf

#34

#4

#6

#16

#21

#7

#10

#12

#13

#14

#15

#17

#28

-109

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-338

-167

#38 -64.5

#62 -64.5

#47 -67.5

#37

#27

#29

#31

#32

#33

#35

#44

#45

#59

#60

#67

#68

#71

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-192

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

#84

#85

#86

#88

#89

#90

#91

#94

#98

-inf -53.6 -inf -55.8 -51.9 -65.9 -63.1 -64.2 -inf

#87 #131 #92

#93

#95

#96 #110

-inf

-149

-inf

-52.5 -51.9

-inf

-inf

#126 -inf

#134 -53.2

#152 -47.7

#156 -47.7

#97 -51.2

#135 -51.2

#154 -inf

#155 -inf

#158 -47.7

#159 -47.7

#160 -48.1

#162 -46.9

#163 -47.7

#164 -47.7

#165 -inf

#166 -47.7

#167 -48.4

#172 -47.7

#173 -47.7

#174 -47.7

#177 -47.7

#185 -47.7

#123 -inf

#124 -inf

#125 -inf

#127 -inf

#128 -50.4

#129 -inf

#130 -50.9

#133 -51.2

#147 -51.6

#168 -inf

#169 -inf

#170 -inf

#171 -46.9

#175 -46.9

#176 -47.1

#178 -58.3

#181 -46.9

#183 -46.9

#201 -46.4

#222 -46.9

#226 -47.1

#139 -50.7

#146 -50.5

#157 -inf

#182 -47.5

#184 -46.9

#179 -inf

#180 -inf

#213 -46.9

#203 -47.1

#193 -inf

#195 -inf

#197 -47.2

#198 -46.9

#200 -48.4

#212 -46.3

#192 -inf

#194 -inf

#196 -55.9

#199 -inf

#227 -inf

#228 -70.6

#229 -inf

#230 -46.3

#235 -46.3

#236 -46.3

#237 -46.3

#241 -inf

#255 -46.3

#268 -46.3

#300 -46.3

#257 -inf

#259 -46.3

#260 -inf

#265 -46.3

#293 -46.9

#294 -48.3

#297 -46.3

#299 -47.2

#256 -46.3

#258 -46.3

#263 -46.8

#267 -46.3

#272 -46.3

#279 -46.5

#284 -46.3

#253 -inf

#262 -46.4

#264 -46.3

#269 -46.3

#273 -46.8

#275 -46.3

#282 -46.1

#308 -46.3

#252 -inf

#254 -inf

#281 -46.3

#288 -46.2

#289 -46.3

#292 -46.1

#310 -46.3

#270 -inf

#271 -inf

#276 -inf

#261 -inf

#277 -47.1

#280 -46.3

#285 -46.3

#290 -45.7

#311 -45.7

#328 -45.7

#266 -46.3

#274 -46.3

#283 -46.3

#286 -46.3

#296 -46.3

#291 -inf

#278 -inf

#295 -54.9

#302 -inf

#304 -45.7

#305 -45.7

#306 -45.7

#307 -inf

#309 -58.4

#312 -45.7

#313 -47.6

#314 -45.7

#315 -45.7

#316 -47.2

#317 -45.4

#321 -45.9

#333 -45.7

#337 -inf

#339 -46.5

#352 -45.4

#355 -45.4

#287 -46.3

#319 -46.3

#301 -50.7

#318 -45.7

#325 -45.7

#320 -45.5

#324 -45.4

#335 -45.6

#336 -45.7

#340 -45.7

#341 -45.6

#327 -45.6

#323 -47.3

#338 -45.7

#342 -inf

#343 -inf

#344 -45.4

#345 -45.5

#349 -42.6

#350 -45

#351 -inf

#354 -45.4

#356 -45.4

#359 -45.5

#360 -45.4

#361 -46.9

#362 -51.7

#363 -45.4

#364 -45.5

#365 -45.4

#368 -inf

#369 -43.3

#370 -42.6

#371 -42.4

#372 -42.6

#373 -43.7

#374 -42.6

#375 -43.3

#376 -42.6

#377 -inf

#378 -44.3

#379 -43.2

#381 -42.6

#388 -42.5

#380 -inf

#382 -42.4

#383 -42.4

#387 -42.4

#394 -inf

#395 -42.4

#405 -42.4

#406 -42.4

#407 -42.4

#408 -42.4

#409 -42.4

#413 -42.4

#414 -43.2

#415 -42.4

#416 -42.4

#418 -42.6

#421 -42.4

#440 -42.4

#443 -42.4

#444 -42.4

#446 -42.4

#478 -42.4

#480 -42.4

#488 -42.4

#436 -42.4

#438 -42.9

#447 -50.7

#435 -42.4

#439 -42.7

#465 -42.4

#431 -inf

#432 -inf

#433 -inf

#468 -43.3

#470 -43.3

#434 -inf

#442 -42.4

#445 -43.5

#430 -inf

#437 -inf

#441 -42.4

#467 -42.4

#469 -42.4

#473 -42.4

#476 -42.9

#472 -42.4

#474 -42.9

#477 -42.4

#501 -43.7

#515 -42.4

#460 -42.4

#464 -inf

#479 -inf

#489 -42.4

#499 -42.4

#517 -42.4

#525 -42.4

#527 -42.4

#514 -43

#503 -43.1

#504 -42.4

#508 -42.4

#513 -43.5

#471 -42.4

#484 -42.4

#519 -42.4

#521 -43.7

#516 -43.6

#526 -42.4

#533 -43.2

#529 -42.4

#537 -42.4

#483 -42.5

#485 -42.6

#486 -43.4

#500 -42.9

#498 -inf

#512 -42

#534 -42.7

#539 -42

#561 -42

#566 -42

#567 -42

#562 -42.4

#552 -42.4

#542 -43.3

#543 -41.9

#544 -42

#573 -41.9

#592 -42

#569 -41.9

#570 -41.9

#571 -43.9

#572 -41.9

#574 -62.5

#609 -41.9

#612 -41.9

#619 -41.9

#624 -41.9

#597 -inf

#600 -41.9

#608 -41.9

#575 -42.1

#595 -41.9

#596 -41.9

#599 -41.9

#603 -41.9

#663 -41.7

#604 -41.9

#606 -41.6

#605 -41.9

#621 -41.9

#631 -41.9

#641 -41.8

#637 -42.2

#626 -inf

#627 -inf

#628 -inf

#629 -inf

#630 -inf

#633 -41.6

#634 -42.1

#635 -41.6

#636 -41.6

#638 -41.6

#639 -41.6

#640 -41.6

#645 -41.5

#648 -41.7

#650 -41.6

#661 -41.6

#643 -41.6

#644 -41.6

#656 -42.2

#664 -41.6

#647 -41.6

#649 -41.6

#679 -41.6

#651 -41.6

#682 -inf

#671 -41.6

#673 -42

#700 -42.3

#672 -41.6

#674 -42.2

#676 -41.6

#678 -41.7

#709 -41.6

#680 -41.6

#681 -41.6

#720 -41.6

#739 -41.6

#742 -41.6

#698 -41.6

#675 -41.6

#677 -41.6

#710 -41.6

#713 -41.6

#702 -41.7

#701 -41.6

#699 -inf

#717 -41

#718 -41.6

#879 -41.6

#705 -inf

#703 -41.6

#712 -41.6

#683 -41.6

#847 -inf

#851 -42.2

#852 -41.8

#727 -41.6

#732 -41

#748 -41

#853 -41.6

#859 -41.6

#890 -41.6

#715 -42.8

#728 -41.6

#716 -41.6

#855 -41.6

#744 -41

#769 -41

#773 -41

#856 -inf

#857 -inf

#871 -41.6

#854 -42.1

#785 -41.7

#882 -41.7

#883 -41.4

#895 -41.6

#770 -40.9

#771 -41

#878 -inf

#898 -41.8

#906 -41.4

#908 -41.4

#916 -41.4

#910 -41.6

#911 -41.7

#912 -41.6

#917 -42

#921 -41.4

#795 -inf

#796 -inf

#798 -40.9

#799 -inf

#837 -40.9

#914 -41.4

#929 -41.4

#930 -41.4

#923 -41.4

#820 -56.5

#823 -101

#931 -inf

#933 -41.4

#938 -41.5

#950 -41.4

#941 -inf

#944 -41.4

#947 -42.3

#953 -41.4

#946 -inf

#949 -41.4

#994 -41.4

#966 -41.4

#954 -41.4

#973 -41.4

#977 -41.4

#981 -41.3

#1015 #1034 -41.3 -41.3

#987 -41.7

#979 -41.4

#1023 -41.4

#1024 -42

#1030 -41.4

#1031 -41.4

#1035 #1044 -41.4 -41.4

#1052 #1057 -41.4 -inf

#1065 -41.4

#1038 -41.4

#1063 -41.7

#1050 -41.4

#1054 -41.4

#1061 #1067 -41.4 -41.9

#1086 #1087 -41.4 -41.4

#1053 -41.4

#1056 -41.4

#1069 #1071 -41.4 -42.1

#1080 #1103 -41.4 -41.4

#1092 #1095 -41.4 -42.2

#1064 #1068 #1072 #1093 #1098 #1110 -41.4 -44.1 -179 -42.1 -41.4 -41.4

#1091 -41.4

#1122 #1115 -41.4 -41.6

#1094 #1109 -42.4 -41.4

#1107 -41.4

#1113 #1142 -41.4 -41.4

#1100 -inf

#1149 -41.4

#1151 -41.4

#1155 -41.4

#1119 -41.4

#1140 #1138 #1148 #1160 -42.3 -41.4 -41.4 -41.4

#1180 -41.4

#1190 #1201 #1212 #1189 -41.4 -41.4 -41.4 -42.2

#1136 -41.4

#1156 -41.4

#1172 #1166 #1176 -41.4 -41.4 -41.4

#1204 #1207 #1213 #1214 #1210 #1222 #1231 #1236 #1224 -41.4 -41.4 -41.7 -41.4 -41.4 -41.4 -41.4 -41.4 -41.4

#1152 -41.4

#1153 #1163 #1164 #1171 #1230 #1244 #1219 #1186 #1191 #1216 #1220 #1232 #1233 #1240 #1253 #1242 #1256 #1257 #1243 -41.4 -41.4 -inf -41.4 -41.4 -41.4 -41.4 -inf -41.4 -41.4 -41.4 -41.4 -41.4 -41.6 -41.4 -41.4 -41.4 -41.4 -41.4

#1183 #1184 #1173 #1188 #1248 -41.4 -41.4 -41.6 -41.4 -41.4

#1196 -41.8

#1252 #1260 -inf -41.4

#1228 -41.4

#1234 #1262 -41.4 -41.4

#1251 -41.4

#1206 #1203 -41.4 -41.4

#1200 -41.6

#1239 #1249 -45.7 -41.4

#1258 -41.4

#1246 #1254 #1264 -41.3 -41.7 -41.4

#1259 -41.3

#1261 -41.3

#1263 #1269 #1272 #1274 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3

#1276 -41.3

#1278 -41.3

#1267 #1273 #1275 #1277 #1302 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3

#1307 -41.3

#1282 #1297 #1289 #1301 #1316 #1325

-41.3 -41.3 -42.4 -42.1 -41.3

-42

#1279 #1303 #1284 #1292 #1334 -inf -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3

#1331 #1300 #1305 #1312 #1317 #1314 #1323 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3

#1326 #1342 #1344 #1376 #1355 #1358 #1321 #1335 #1336 #1318 #1332 #1348 #1352

-44

-41.3

-42

-41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3

-inf

-41.3 -41.7 -41.3

#1389 #1378 #1384 #1374 #1383 #1409 #1351 #1390 #1393 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -42.5 -325

#1401 -41.3

#1367 -inf

#1392 #1394 #1416 #1399 #1377 #1379 #1385

-41.3 -41.3

-42

-41.3 -41.7 -41.3 -41.3

#1400 -41.3

#1413 -86.8

#1414 -41.3

#1397 #1402 -inf -41.5

#1453 -41.3

#1421 #1436 -41.3 -41.3

#1420 -41.3

#1426 -41.3

#1437 #1440 #1442 #1450 -41.3 -41.3 -41.7 -41.5

#1471 #1478 #1482 #1454 #1467 #1448 #1452 #1457 #1444 -41.3 -41.5 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.9 -41.3

#1460 #1466 #1475 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3

#1480 -41.3

#1506 #1464 -41.5 -41.3

#1456 #1493 #1463 #1481 #1483 #1515 #1533 #1473 #1489 #1490 -inf -41.3 -inf -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -inf -41.9 -41.3

#1512 -41.3

#1525 #1523 -41.6 -41.4

#1502 -41.3

#1526 -41.3

#1530 -41.3

#1517 #1518 #1537 #1538 #1544 #1548 #1547 -41.3 -41.5 -41.3 -41.3 -41.5 -41.3 -41.3

#1559 -41.5

#1585 #1550 -41.3 -41.3

#1571 #1573 #1575 -41.3 -41.3 -42.5

#1609 #1556 -42.6 -41.3

#1587 #1605

-inf

-139

#1592 -41.3

#1568 -41.3

#1604 -41.3

#1574 -41.3

#1627 #1630 -41.3 -41.3

#1651 -41.3

#1595 -41.3

#1601 -41.3

#1644 #1656 -41.3 -41.3

#1671 #1677 -41.3 -41.3

#1611 -41.3

#1622 -41.3

#1612 #1613 -inf -41.3

#1649 #1668 #1700 -inf -41.3 -41.8

#1697 -41.3

#1698 -41.3

#1652 #1655 -41.3 -41.3

#1639 #1643 -41.3 -41.3

#1629 -42.4

#1688 #1689 #1696 #1732 #1754 #1708 #1726 -41.9 -41.3 -41.3 -42.2 -42.1 -41.7 -41.3

#1682 -41.3

#1693 -41.3

#1647 #1664 -41.3 -41.7

#1707 #1721 -41.3 -41.3

#1758 -41.3

#1763 -41.3

#1719 -41.3

#1670 #1672 -41.3 -41.3

#1747 #1761 -41.3 -inf

#1770 #1774 -41.3 -41.3

#1782 -41.3

#1701 -41.3

#1711 -41.3

#1714 -41.3

#1783 -41.3

#1786 -41.3

#1794 #1792 #1811 #1784 #1797 -41.3 -inf -41.3 -41.3 -41.3

#1810 #1718 #1730 #1743 #1731 #1737 #1738 #1741 #1723 -inf -41.9 -41.3 -41.5 -inf -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -inf

#1802 -41.3

#1812 -41.3

#1817 -41.3

#1818 #1804 #1813 #1855 #1857 #1862 #1849 #1815 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3

#1751 -41.3

#1746 #1750 #1745

-41.3 -inf

-inf

#1852 -41.3

#1844 #1845 #1858 #1841 #1861 #1824 #1856 #1823 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3

#1785 -41.3

#1788 -41.3

#1796 #1798 #1799 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3

#1762 -41.3

#1868 #1860 #1871 #1875 #1887 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -40.6 -41.3

#1854 #1872 #1864 #1873 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3

#1814 #1842 #1846 #1829 #1834 #1821 -149 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.3 -41.9

#1776 -inf

#1890 -40.6

#1892 #1893 -40.6 -40.6

#1895 #1897 #1901 #1905 #1909 #1917 #1888 #1884 -40.6 -40.6 -40.6 -40.6 -40.6 -40.6 -41.3 -41.3

#1880 -41.6

#1866 #1908 -41.3 -40.5

#1945 #1949 #1910 #1911 #1915 #1921 #1900 #1912 #1925 #1967 #1973

-40.5 -40.5 -40.6 -40.6 -40.6 -41.4

-41

-40.6 -40.6 -40.6 -40.6

#1926 #1927 #1930

-inf

-101 -40.5

1937 -40.5

#1939 #1940 -41.1 -40.7

1960 -40.5

1975 -40.5

#1935 #1938 -40.6 -40.6

#1969 #1989 -40.6 -inf

#1941 #1942 #1976 #1943 -40.5 -40.7 -40.5 -inf

#1956 #1957 #1968 #1971 #1974 #1997 #1998

-inf

-328 -40.5 -41.1 -40.6 -40.5 -40.5

#1987 #1993 #1995 -inf -40.7 -40.9

#1984 -40.6

2000

Extended Data Fig. 6 | Breakthrough plot and solution tree for the COVID-19 prediction task. Top Figure Breakthrough plot for the retrospective COVID-19 prediction, showing the evolution of the maximum score as a function of the number of nodes. The green dots label places where the score abruptly increases due to an improvement in the code, and the label describes the change in the code that resulted in the score increase. Bottom Figure Structure of the tree for this same search. The color range consists of orange (lower scores) to green (higher scores) with the highest score denoted by a diamond node.

31

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Extended Data Fig. 7 | Performance of recombination experiments for COVID-19 forecasting. This series of bar plots illustrates the average WIS achieved by various hybrid models (right bar, labeled "Recomb") compared to their constituent baseline models (left bars, typically light blue) from the CovidHub competition. Each subplot represents a recombination experiment, demonstrating the success of our system in synthesizing novel forecasting strategies. Green bars indicate that the recombination outperformed both parent models, dark blue indicates it outperformed one, and red indicates it outperformed neither. These results emphasize the search system's ability to combine the strengths of existing methodologies to achieve superior predictive performance.
32

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

-0.60 -0.65 -0.70

Node #482 Secondary seasonality now captures DayOfWeek-HourOfDay interactions.
Node #851 Dynamically infers seasonality period from data frequency.

Maximum Score

-0.75 -0.80

Node #169 Exponential decay for residual correction forecasting.

-0.85

Node #4 Reduced and generalized forecasting configurations.

-0.90 0

200

400

600

800

1000

Number of Nodes

#783 -0.646
#805 #806 #810 -inf -0.675 -0.646
#830 #831 #835 -0.666 -0.673 -0.645

#0 nan

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5

#6

#7

#8

#9

#10

#11

#12

#13

-0.906 -0.873 -0.899 -0.794 -0.858 -0.73 -0.853 -0.851 -0.899 -0.835 -0.887 -0.912 -0.835

#14

#15

-0.69 -0.884

#16

#17

#18

#19

-0.754 -0.876 -0.892 -0.85

#20 -0.734

#22

#23

#32

#33

#34

#35

#38

-0.831 -0.806 -0.814 -0.736 -0.905 -0.73 -0.731

#21 -1.06

#30

#27

#40

-0.862 -0.751 -0.69

#41

#42

#43

#44

#45

#46

#47

#49

#51

-0.77 -0.76 -0.838 -0.723 -inf -0.765 -0.834 -0.939 -0.707

#52 -0.69

#56 -0.702

#58

#59

#60

#24

#25

#26

#28

#29

#31

#36

#37

#39

-0.69 -0.705 -0.713 -0.863 -0.882 -0.996 -0.887 -0.964 -1.07 -0.858 -0.92 -0.895

#50

#53

#54

#55

#57

#65

#48

#70

#71

#72

#83

#87

#90

#97

#98

#61

#62

#63

#64

#66

#67

#68

#69

#75

#76

#79

#81

#86

#91

#96 #101 #78

#84

#73

-0.734 -0.782 -0.73 -0.731 -0.75 -0.731 -0.751 -0.767 -0.739 -0.739 -0.772 -0.885 -0.703 -0.712 -0.699 -0.724 -0.726 -0.883 -0.724 -0.721 -0.771 -0.827 -0.744 -0.729 -0.741 -0.78 -0.688 -0.705 -0.69 -0.757 -0.692 -0.756 -0.746 -0.69

#74 -0.69

#77 -0.69

#82

#85

#89

-0.69 -0.699 -0.69

#80

#88

-0.91 -0.867

#107 -0.688

#108 #109 #111 #112 #114 #117 #118 #119 #120 #115 #116 #102 -0.696 -0.74 -0.767 -0.725 -0.722 -0.688 -0.773 -0.727 -0.696 -0.703 -0.912 -0.69

#103 -0.69

#104 -0.69

#105 -0.69

#106 #92

#95

#93

#94

#99 #100 #110

-0.69 -0.756 -0.719 -10.3 -0.695 -0.69 -0.752 -0.76

#113 -0.69

#121 #122 #123 #124 #125 #126 #128 #129 #131 #132 #135 #136 #137 #140 #141 #142 #143 -0.747 -0.878 -0.738 -0.688 -0.713 -0.738 -0.695 -0.715 -0.724 -0.855 -0.912 -0.847 -0.717 -0.688 -0.711 -0.694 -0.735

#144 #145 #146 -0.758 -0.779 -0.73

#147 -0.79

#148 #149 #151 #152 -0.95 -0.688 -0.739 -0.821

#153 #154 #155 #127 #130 #133 -0.688 -0.749 -0.907 -0.997 -0.726 -0.9

#139 -0.69

#134 -0.69

#138 -0.69

#156 #157 #158 #159 #160 -0.868 -0.843 -0.833 -0.861 -0.722

#162 #163 #170 #174 -0.723 -0.691 -0.742 -0.688

#164 #165 #166 #167 #168 -0.747 -0.738 -0.812 -0.849 -0.688

#169 #171 #172 #173 #175 #176 #180 #184 #185 #186 #187 #188 #189 #177 #178 #179 #183 #150 #161 -0.685 -0.767 -0.853 -0.712 -0.786 -0.828 -0.688 -0.718 -0.734 -0.718 -0.694 -0.822 -0.768 -0.813 -0.799 -0.827 -0.697 -0.69 -0.689

#192 #202 #193 -0.704 -0.773 -0.688

#194 #196 #200 -0.815 -0.689 -0.688

#204 #207 #190 #191 #195 #197 -0.728 -0.691 -0.816 -0.786 -0.81 -0.685

#199 #201 #203 #205 #206 #214 #220 #208 #209 #210 #211 #213 -0.685 -0.831 -0.708 -0.748 -0.736 -0.717 -0.793 -0.922 -0.742 -0.859 -0.726 -0.714

#181 #182 -0.689 -0.689

#215 #216 #217 #218 #219 #230 #231 #235 #244 #221 #223 #226 -0.728 -0.828 -0.953 -0.849 -0.785 -0.767 -0.741 -0.759 -0.688 -0.734 -0.844 -0.685

#228 #229 #233 #237 #239 #241 #243 #246 #247 #222 #224 #225 #227 #232 #234 #236 #238 #240 #242 #245 #248 #249 -0.708 -0.844 -0.75 -0.822 -0.705 -0.827 -0.708 -0.688 -0.763 -0.783 -0.793 -0.733 -0.804 -0.685 -0.762 -0.724 -0.803 -0.751 -0.704 -0.69 -0.701 -0.766

#212 #198 -0.689 -0.694

#268 -0.688

#269 -0.688

#270 -0.7

#282 #250 #251 #252 #253 -0.695 -0.756 -0.708 -0.741 -0.737

#259 -1.04

#260 #263 #266 -0.791 -0.695 -0.789

#267 -0.72

#272 -0.684

#274 #276 -0.773 -0.706

#279 -0.684

#281 -0.685

#284 #286 #287 #289 #262 #254 #255 #256 #257 #258 #261 #264 #265 #271 #273 #275 #277 #278 #280 #283 #285 #288 -0.684 -0.738 -0.784 -0.781 -0.726 -0.937 -0.981 -0.846 -0.732 -0.775 -0.761 -0.944 -0.773 -0.77 -0.771 -0.751 -0.903 -0.887 -0.786 -0.703 -0.819 -0.859

#295 #299 #292 #300 -0.688 -0.689 -0.878 -0.687

#290 #291 #293 -0.817 -0.712 -0.684

#294 #296 #297 #298 #301 #302 #303 #304 #305 #308 #309 #311 #314 #316 #318 #326 #334 #337 #338 #340 #344 #345 #347 #351 #307 #313 #329 #393 #306 #310 #312 #315 #317 #327 #335 #339 #343 #346 #350 #373 #384 #387 #392 -0.699 -0.713 -0.72 -0.987 -0.783 -0.684 -0.774 -0.764 -0.762 -0.761 -inf -0.718 -0.745 -0.775 -0.702 -0.684 -0.715 -0.754 -0.719 -0.879 -0.73 -0.724 -0.71 -0.736 -0.758 -0.808 -0.77 -0.803 -0.707 -0.843 -0.746 -0.736 -0.817 -0.804 -0.736 -0.775 -0.828 -0.796 -0.807 -0.713 -0.77 -0.786 -0.745

#324 -0.738

#319 #320 #321 #322 #323 #325 #328 #342 #348 #330 #331 #332 #333 #336 #341 #349 #352 -0.695 -0.862 -0.735 -0.79 -0.747 -0.767 -0.771 -0.709 -0.684 -0.874 -0.702 -0.788 -0.774 -0.686 -0.712 -0.749 -0.69

#353 #354 #355 #357 #358 #359 #360 #362 -0.98 -0.745 -0.746 -0.705 -0.751 -0.707 -0.715 -0.72

#363 -0.69

#364 #365 #366 #367 #368 #369 #370 #371 #372 #381 #382 #383 #385 #386 #388 -0.69 -0.736 -0.715 -0.773 -0.785 -0.684 -0.813 -0.732 -0.691 -0.684 -0.759 -0.706 -0.738 -0.712 -0.714

#390 #391 -0.684 -0.725

#374 #375 #376 -0.717 -0.718 -0.691

#377 -inf

#378 #379 #380 #389 -0.684 -0.751 -0.773 -0.743

#356 #361 -0.689 -0.714

#394 #395 #399 #402 #404 #407 #409 #412 #396 #398 #400 #403 #405 -0.684 -0.71 -0.717 -0.788 -0.713 -0.687 -0.731 -0.726 -0.718 -0.782 -0.75 -0.684 -0.726

#408 #410 -0.684 -0.741

#411 -0.685

#413 -0.684

#414 #415 #416 -0.754 -0.736 -0.793

#417 #418 -0.684 -0.859

#419 -0.7

#397 #401 #406 -0.818 -0.727 -0.716

#420 -0.684

#421 #422 #423 #430 #431 #435 -0.854 -0.74 -0.687 -0.706 -0.871 -0.706

#428 #424 #425 #426 #427 #429 #433 #434 #441 #442 #447 #448 -0.736 -0.714 -0.836 -0.739 -0.783 -0.701 -0.758 -0.684 -0.788 -0.784 -0.852 -0.727

#453 -0.78

#468 #473 #476 #490 #432 #438 #439 #443 -0.788 -0.757 -0.706 -0.829 -0.708 -0.764 -0.747 -0.684

#450 -0.7

#436 #437 #440 #451 #465 #470 #475 #488 #491 -0.711 -0.701 -0.727 -0.857 -0.755 -0.759 -0.826 -0.753 -0.841

#444 #445 #446 #449 #463 #466 #471 -0.784 -0.824 -1.04 -0.736 -0.872 -0.684 -0.729

#478

#452

-0.684 -0.758

#454 #455 #458 #461 #464 #469 #472 #479 -0.717 -0.685 -0.684 -0.754 -0.778 -0.742 -0.737 -0.713

#456 #457 #459 #460 #462 #467 #474 #477 -0.726 -0.694 -0.732 -0.739 -0.709 -0.706 -0.707 -0.796

#492 #493 #494 #495 #498 #499 #500 #502 #503 #497 #501 -1.05 -0.801 -0.756 -0.684 -0.842 -0.784 -0.693 -0.862 -1.75 -0.747 -0.807

#480 -0.686

#481 #482 #483 #484 #485 #486 #487 -0.783 -0.646 -1.04 -0.873 -0.697 -0.754 -0.81

#489 #504 -0.684 -0.795

#525 #526 #527 #530 -0.684 -0.856 -0.88 -0.684

#496 #506 #507 #508 #510 #511 #512 #514 #515 #516 #517 #518 #520 #528 -0.738 -0.715 -0.696 -0.815 -0.672 -0.779 -0.723 -0.652 -0.72 -0.664 -0.691 -0.768 -0.715 -0.646

#529 #531 #532 #533 #534 #535 #536 -0.657 -0.646 -0.782 -0.858 -0.692 -0.914 -0.787

#505 #509 #513 #519 -0.684 -0.685 -0.711 -0.704

#540 -0.684

#547 -0.684

#544 #545 -0.817 -0.683

#548 #537 #539 #542 #549 #538 #541 #543 #565 #550 #552 #556 -0.985 -0.716 -0.696 -0.856 -0.652 -0.896 -0.705 -0.786 -0.738 -0.668 -0.688 -0.646

#559 #563 -0.658 -0.74

#566 #551 #555 #558 #564 #553 #554 #557 #560 #561 #521 #522 #523 #524 -0.646 -0.657 -0.702 -0.747 -0.736 -0.688 -0.713 -0.668 -0.726 -0.703 -0.684 -0.742 -0.771 -0.898

#562 -0.684

#570 #572 #573 #575 #577 #588 #567 #571 -0.879 -0.755 -0.672 -0.684 -0.652 -0.761 -0.694 -0.72

#581 #582 #583 -0.72 -0.646 -0.646

#584 -0.681

#586 #594 #578 #579 #587 #589 #590 #591 #592 #593 #568 #569 #585 #574 #576 #546 -0.646 -0.649 -0.668 -0.668 -0.668 -0.79 -0.649 -0.721 -0.668 -0.663 -0.704 -0.657 -0.715 -1.21 -0.669 -0.72

#580 #600 #601 #602 #604 #605 #613 -0.73 -0.824 -0.771 -0.652 -0.689 -0.739 -0.645

#621 #624 #607 #611 #619 #603 #606 #614 #620 #626 #610 #615 #599 #598 #622 #608 #618 #634 #623 #609 #595 #597 #596 -0.646 -0.679 -0.648 -0.699 -0.68 -0.678 -0.675 -0.66 -0.693 -0.686 -0.663 -0.729 -0.76 -0.658 -0.658 -0.798 -0.725 -0.751 -0.755 -0.663 -0.664 -0.657 -0.782

#627 #629 #635 #636 #638 #640 #641 #643 #644 #825 #832 -0.693 -0.753 -0.646 -0.666 -0.837 -0.83 -0.693 -0.674 -0.689 -0.761 -0.65

#833 #834 #646 #647 #648 #650 -0.77 -0.733 -0.655 -0.667 -0.646 -0.646

#652 #653 -0.646 -0.67

#631 #632 -0.648 -0.769

#633 #639 #628 -0.648 -0.741 -0.678

#612 #649 -0.681 -0.757

#630 #616 #617 -0.663 -0.687 -0.657

#625 -0.657

#655 #656 #658 #662 #663 #665 -0.657 -0.851 -0.721 -0.677 -0.646 -0.695

#667 #668 #669 #670 -0.661 -0.659 -0.649 -0.646

#671 #673 #674 #675 #679 #680 #688 #676 #677 #678 #681 #682 #654 #661 #657 #659 #664 -0.713 -0.67 -0.671 -0.646 -0.653 -0.758 -0.686 -0.646 -0.659 -0.677 -0.677 -0.646 -0.703 -0.759 -0.649 -0.795 -0.796

#651 -0.655

#637 #645 #642 -0.674 -0.657 -0.657

#684 #685 #687 #691 #692 #693 #694 #695 #699 #701 #703 #711 #705 #700 #702 #704 #722 #729 #696 #697 -0.727 -0.853 -0.649 -0.649 -0.646 -0.654 -0.646 -0.667 -0.791 -0.668 -0.647 -0.695 -0.675 -0.67 -0.691 -0.764 -0.678 -0.667 -0.651 -0.646

#698 #683 #690 -0.646 -0.655 -0.66

#672 -0.655

#666 #660 -0.657 -0.659

#707 #716 #712 #715 #717 #726 #708 #709 #710 #727 #721 -0.657 -0.649 -0.646 -0.671 -0.667 -0.662 -0.779 -0.663 -0.646 -0.742 -0.804

#720 #723 #724 #725 #728 #713 #714 -0.675 -0.661 -0.651 -0.661 -0.646 -0.671 -0.646

#718 -0.646

#719 -0.646

#730 #706 #689 #686 -0.646 -0.767 -0.668 -0.669

#732 #731 #733 -0.679 -0.662 -0.698

#734 #737 -0.664 -0.671

#745 -0.646

#748 #752 #758 #738 #739 #740 #756 #742 #743 #744 -0.759 -0.661 -0.682 -0.651 -0.672 -0.646 -0.716 -0.668 -0.646 -0.667

#754 -0.646

#735 -0.646

#736 -0.65

#741 #746 -0.664 -0.648

#747 -inf

#749 #757 #760 -0.669 -0.646 -0.682

#769 -0.646

#770 -0.651

#761 #764 -0.647 -0.646

#767 -0.646

#762 -0.646

#763 -0.646

#766 -0.646

#771 -0.646

#773 -0.646

#750 #751 #753 #755 #759 #765 #777 #782 -0.646 -0.646 -0.646 -0.666 -0.65 -0.657 -0.646 -0.651

#790 #803 -0.646 -0.673

#778 #779 #791 #793 #786 #789 #804 #787 #788 #807 #780 #781 #794 #796 #795 #799 #811 #768 #772 #776 -0.671 -0.651 -0.659 -0.646 -0.731 -0.658 -0.646 -0.664 -0.659 -0.646 -0.646 -0.646 -0.646 -0.656 -0.683 -0.646 -0.672 -0.646 -0.646 -0.77

#774 #775 #798 #801 #814 -0.65 -0.694 -0.692 -0.646 -0.731

#812 #813 -0.645 -0.682

#815 #816 -0.65 -0.732

#826 #828 #827 #829 #802 #797 #800 #817 #818 #823 #824 #784 #785 #809 #792 -0.646 -0.66 -0.646 -0.676 -0.646 -0.646 -0.654 -0.683 -0.683 -0.646 -0.718 -0.652 -0.667 -0.667 -0.646

#819 #821 -0.676 -0.68

#836 -0.645

#837 #838 #839 #840 #842 #843 #845 #848 -0.664 -0.703 -0.665 -0.709 -0.645 -0.688 -0.666 -0.829

851 -0.639

#841 #844 #849 #850 -0.646 -0.648 -0.657 -0.673

#820 #822 -0.661 -0.671

#846 #847 -0.651 -0.646

#808 -0.713

#858 #859 #861 #862 #864 #865 #852 #853 #854 #855 #856 #857 #872 #874 #866 #867 #868 #869 #870 #871 #873 #875 -0.645 -0.756 -0.876 -0.673 -0.646 -0.66 -0.681 -0.691 -0.651 -0.67 -0.672 -0.668 -0.674 -0.645 -0.667 -0.658 -0.656 -0.645 -0.689 -0.682 -0.669 -0.647

#876 #877 -0.653 -0.644

#878 -0.641

#879 -0.643

#883 -0.644

885 -0.639

#860 -0.672

#863 -0.67

#880 #881 #882 #884 -0.651 -0.684 -0.679 -0.667

#891 #892 #900 #886 #887 #888 #889 #890 -0.653 -0.685 -0.657 -0.656 -0.663 -0.658 -0.656 -0.644

#893 -0.641

#894 #898 #912 #895 #896 #897 #899 #904 #905 #908 -0.646 -0.646 -0.642 -0.646 -0.641 -0.647 -0.657 -0.648 -0.65 -0.644

#911 -0.642

#901 #906 #909 -0.706 -0.641 -0.652

#902 -0.639

#903 -0.648

#907 -0.641

#910 #916 -0.642 -0.666

#913 #914 #915 #917 -0.659 -0.644 -0.679 -0.661

#918 #919 #922 -0.657 -0.654 -0.642

#933 #940 #920 #921 #946 #958 #983 #925 #926 #934 #937 #954 #928 #935 #951 #959 #984 -0.642 -0.643 -0.69 -0.754 -inf -0.681 -0.674 -0.643 -0.657 -0.671 -0.644 -0.644 -0.646 -0.647 -0.658 -0.657 -0.645

#923 #924 #927 #930 #932 #942 #956 #979 #986 -0.859 -0.639 -0.665 -0.651 -0.662 -0.649 -0.657 -0.655 -0.64

#931 #936 -0.658 -0.717

#952 #973 -0.642 -0.66

#929 #943 -0.698 -0.644

#944 -0.642

#945 #955 #949 #950 #957 #989 #963 #966 -0.643 -0.677 -0.663 -0.692 -0.668 -0.647 -0.644 -0.662

#947 #948 #987 #961 #967 #977 #978 -0.647 -0.741 -0.643 -0.664 -0.803 -0.644 -0.644

#993 #997 #938 #939 #941 #953 #960 #982 -0.657 -0.648 -0.656 -0.669 -0.646 -0.698 -0.659 -0.64

#988 #1001 #1003 #1009 #1013 #1017 #974 #975 #976 #991 -0.642 -0.672 -0.673 -0.722 -0.708 -0.641 -0.669 -0.708 -0.644 -0.665

#962 #968 #969 #970 #971 #985 #964 #965 #972 -0.674 -0.676 -0.664 -0.69 -0.642 -0.642 -0.665 -0.646 -0.776

#980 #981 #990 -0.67 -0.657 -0.65

#1010 #1015 -0.662 -0.645

#998 #1004 -0.644 -0.644

#999 #1002 #1008 #1012 #1016 #1005 #1006 #1014 -0.656 -0.659 -0.692 -0.66 -0.644 -0.643 -0.645 -0.658

#1000 -0.741

#992 #994 #995 #996 #1007 #1011 -0.645 -0.673 -0.701 -0.663 -0.642 -0.647

Extended Data Fig. 8 | Breakthrough plot and solution tree for the time series prediction task. Top Figure Breakthrough plot for the GIFT-Eval tree search, showing the evolution of the maximum score as a function of the number of nodes. The green dots label places where the score abruptly increases due to an improvement in the code, and the label describes the change in the code that resulted in the score increase. Bottom Figure Structure of the tree for this same search. The color range consists of orange (lower scores) to green (higher scores) with the highest score denoted by a diamond node.

33

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Extended Data Tables

Extended Data Table 1 | Expert manual inspection of adherence of ERA implementation to scRNA-seq batch integration method.

Method
batchelor fastMNN batchelor fastMNN batchelor fastMNN batchelor mnnCorrect batchelor mnnCorrect batchelor mnnCorrect BBKNN
BBKNN
BBKNN
ComBat ComBat ComBat Harmony Harmony Harmony LIGER LIGER
LIGER No advice
No advice No advice SCALEX SCALEX
SCALEX
Scanorama Scanorama Scanorama scVI
scVI
scVI
TabVI TabVI TabVI

Replicate
0 1 2 0 1 2 0
1
2
0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1
2 0
1 2 0 1
2
0 1 2 0
1
2
0 1 2

Judgment
Follow Follow Follow Follow Follow Follow Follow
Follow + Innovative
Follow
Follow Follow Follow Follow Follow Follow Follow Follow
Does not follow Follow
Follow Follow Follow Follow
Follow
Follow Does not follow Follow Follow
Follow
Follow
Follow Follow Follow

Notes
Adds distances between batches, performs spectral clustering on the graph. Does not compute connectivities. Standardize + ComBat + PCA for embedding. BBKNN implemented on that embedding. Corrects the data, computes neighbors, final embedding is UMAP supposedly based on neighbors.
Entropy-based diversity penalty. Linear diversity penalty. Linear diversity penalty. Uses sklearn.NMF with multiplicative update solver. Writes NMF function from scratch. Builds single global KNN graph rather than by batch. Uses ComBat + SVD. Uses batch-specific mean+std for all genes to rescale. Then PCA. ComBat + SVD ComBat + PCA Adds log_var clipping and weight normalization. Learns batch embedding. Learns gamma and beta conditioned on batch index. Batch index not supplied to first layer of decoder. Uses min_delta for robust early stopping. batch_index not supplied to the first layer of the decoder.
Implements mnnpy via sc.external.pp.mnn_correct.
Applies log1p scaling with ZINB loss. Fits global dispersion theta rather than batch-specific. Applies optional log1p scaling with ZINB loss. Fits global dispersion theta rather than batch-specific. Expression frequency exponentiated rather than softmaxed. Applies log1p scaling with ZINB loss. Fits global dispersion theta rather than batch-specific.

34

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
A. Supplementary Notes
A.1. Geospatial Analysis: Segmentation of Remote Sensing Images
We ran ERA on a problem in geospatial analysis: semantic segmentation of high-resolution remote sensing images. Semantic segmentation is a computer vision task that involves assigning a specific class label to every single pixel in an image. It is essential for diverse applications, ranging from monitoring land use, assessing the environmental impacts of human activity and managing natural disasters. The primary difficulty is significant visual heterogeneity. Aerial and satellite images of the same location can differ dramatically due to variations in time of day, season, and weather conditions, while even objects within a single class (e.g. buildings) exhibit substantial diversity in size, shape, height, function and lighting conditions.
A recent paper20 introduces the "dense labeling remote sensing dataset" (DLRSD) for advanced remote sensing tasks, including multi-label classification, image retrieval, and pixel-based applications like semantic segmentation. This dataset is a densely labeled version of the UC Merced Land Use Dataset71, a widely-used benchmark for image-level land use classification, whereby individual pixels of each image are labeled with 17 class labels.
We prompted ERA to train a model to classify pixels into the land cover classes and provided a prespecified, reproducible 80/20 train/test split of imagery in the DLRSD dataset. For each experiment, we validated model performance on the held out test set of 420 randomly selected images using a standard "mean intersection over union" (mIoU) metric.
The three top performing solutions generated by tree search significantly outperformed reported results in recent academic papers on the DLRSD benchmark, achieving mIoU greater than 0.80 (Supplementary Table S14, Supplementary Fig. S14). All three solutions build upon existing models, libraries and strategies. Solutions 1 and 3 leverage standard UNet++ and U-Net models but paired with powerful encoders (efficientnet-b7 and se-resnext101-32x4d) pre-trained on ImageNet72. Solution 2 uses SegFormer, a state of the art Transformer-based architecture. Key differentiators among the models included their data augmentation and prediction strategies. The U-Net++ and U-Net models leveraged extensive augmentation from the Albumentations library, whereas the Segformer model used a more basic set of transforms. All three solutions employ extensive Test-Time Augmentation (TTA)73 by predicting masks for multiple augmented versions of a single test image (e.g., horizontal flips, vertical flips, rotations) which are then reverse-transformed and averaged to produce a final, more robust mask which smooths out prediction errors and boosts performance. A representative tree and breakthrough plot for Solution 3 is shown in Supplementary Fig. S15.
A.2. Neuroscience: Whole-Brain Neural Activity Prediction
We consider the Zebrafish Activity Prediction Benchmark (ZAPBench), a recent dataset designed to test predictions of cellular-resolution neural activity in an entire vertebrate brain21. The benchmark uses a novel dataset capturing brain activity of a larval zebrafish over a two-hour session using light-sheet fluorescent microscopy, resulting in 3D brain volumes recorded over time. Throughout the recording, the animal was exposed to distinct visual stimulus conditions designed to elicit a range of different behaviors. The raw volumetric video data was extensively processed to align, motion-stabilize, and segment into activity traces, resulting in a final data matrix of activity traces for 71,721 neurons across 7,879 time steps.
Several state-of-the-art forecasting methods were evaluated on the benchmark21, including timeseries forecasting methods that operate on the extracted activity traces per neuron, as well as a volumetric video prediction model (a Unet variant) that directly processes the 3D brain volumes
35

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
over time74. The video-based approach exploits spatial information that is lost when converting the data to time series, but is computationally expensive. Among the different methods evaluated on the benchmark, the video-based Unet model achieved the best overall performance, especially in the setting where only a short window of past context is available.
We prompted ERA to solve the multivariate time-series forecasting problem, predicting the output activity of all neurons for up to 32 time steps ahead in the time-series domain, given their past 4 time steps of activity as context, using the dataset splits provided by ZAPBench21 which split each stimulus condition into 70% for training, 10% for validation, and 20% for testing per stimulus condition. We used the validation set for model selection, including hyperparameter tuning and early stopping, and to obtain a score to guide the tree search. We score solutions using mean absolute error (MAE) averaged across the prediction horizon, and compare solutions found by tree search against the methods included in ZAPBench: These include a linear model75, TiDE76, TSMixer77, Time-Mix (a variant of TSMixer where feature mixing is ablated), and a custom Unet architecture74.
Our initial experiment using tree search led to a best-performing model that uses a rich feature set from the input window, combining temporal convolutions, a learned "global brain state", and neuron-specific embeddings. The model then processes these features through a series of weightshared residual blocks and a final dense layer to generate the multi-step prediction in one shot. Supplementary Fig. S16 shows the result of this model, compared to other baselines. In that figure, the mean baseline predicts the average over the context window, while the stimulus baseline predicts the average for each stimulus phase. Remarkably, the model produced by tree search outperformed all other baselines, including the best-performing video model, except for 1-step-ahead predictions. A representative example of the breakthrough plot and tree is shown in Supplementary Fig. S17.
We then developed a separate model tuned specifically for 1-step-ahead predictions with another tree search. The resulting solution is conceptually similar to the first in that both architectures generate a learned global context vector to inform their per-feature predictions. However, this model computes its global context using a dynamic attention mechanism for weighted aggregation and modulates feature representations through a FiLM-like layer78 for interactive conditioning. This model achieved leading performance on 1-step-ahead predictions (Supplementary Fig. S16).
Both of these solutions are orders of magnitude faster to train than the best-performing video modelŁless than two hours on a single T4 GPU, as compared to 36 hours on 16 A100 GPUs for the Unet model. In addition, our solutions effectively use cross-neuron information to generate predictions, a major challenge highlighted in previous work21.
A key future direction is the development of models that incorporate biophysical information and are more interpretable. The forthcoming synaptic-level structural reconstruction of the larval zebrafish brain used for ZAPBench provides a unique opportunity to develop such models by integrating anatomical wiring diagrams. As an initial exploratory step, we prompted ERA to use Jaxley79, a JAX-based library for differentiable simulation of biophysically detailed neuron models, for the tree search. The resulting best-performing solution simulates each neuron independently using single-compartment Hodgkin-Huxley models80. Crucially, it dynamically modulates each neuron's biophysical parameters based on its recent activity history. To account for inter-neuronal interactions without the computational cost of direct synaptic simulation, the model then processes the outputs of these independent simulations through a latent autoencoder. This learns a system-wide corrective signal, effectively modeling a functional connectomeŁa reasonable hybrid approach in the absence of the structural connectome. While this model did not outperform the top-performing video model, it was competitive with time-series baselines (Supplementary Fig. S16).
36

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

A.3. Numerical Analysis: Library for Numerical Evaluation of Difficult Integrals
We applied ERA to the problem of numerical evaluation of difficult integrals using Gaussian quadratures. The gold standard, QUADPACK81, was developed in the 1980s and underlies the popular Python function scipy.integrate.quad(). However, this function can fail in multiple ways, among them: the underlying algorithm can fail to converge; the algorithm samples its integrand, and the sampling may miss important features; the algorithm loses precision when the problem exhibits precise cancellations.
While standard techniques exist to address these problems, we asked whether ERA could build a general-purpose method superior to quad(), by hill-climbing on a benchmark set of integrals for which the standard algorithm fails but the analytic solution is known. Our dataset consists of 38 oscillatory integrals with infinite upper limits and without other pathologies, for which quad() returned an incorrect answer (Supplementary Fig. S18).
To build this list of integrals, we started with a long list of integrals in LaTeX form from Gradshteyn and Ryzhik82. We converted both the question and solution into a python expression using SymPy83. Most expressions included free parameters, often with value constraints. To enable numeric evaluations, we generated random values for all parameters consistent with the constraints.
Once an integral and its answer were in the form of SymPy expression objects, we evaluated answers numerically by substituting our chosen parameter values using sympy.Expr.subs() and evaluating via sympy.evalf(). We build integrand functions suitable for scipy.integrate.quad() via sympy.lambdify for efficient evaluation. We compared each numerical answer to the number returned by scipy.integrate.quad() and discarded cases where the numbers agreed within the latter's error estimate. We also discarded cases where that error estimate was greater than 2% of the numbers' magnitude.
All conversions from LaTeX to SymPy and all constrained parameter generations were performed by Gemini using specialized prompts. The resulting SymPy expressions and parameter values were examined manually for correctness. These manual steps were the limiting factor on the scale of our dataset.
We randomly split these into training and evaluation datasets (n=19 integrals each). We initialized ERA with a simple invocation of quad() and prompted the system to improve it on a tree search over 1000 nodes. We scored solutions with the logarithm of the absolute fractional error (discrepancy between the generated solution's number and the answer's number), where the logarithm prevented the search from over-weighting outliers.

score = - log

1+

response - answer answer

(2)

The resulting breakthrough plot and tree structure for the search are shown in Supplementary Fig. S19.
The best solution builds on quad() by partitioning the infinite domain into a sequence of contiguous, finite subintervals whose lengths may increase geometrically to cover the domain's tail more efficiently. The definite integral is thus transformed into an infinite series, where each term is the numerical integral of the integrand over one of these finite segments, calculated using quad(). For integrals that converge slowly, such as those with oscillatory integrands, direct summation of this series is impractical. The algorithm therefore applies Euler's transformation, a powerful series acceleration technique, to this sequence of segment integrals. By repeatedly averaging adjacent terms, the transformation extrapolates the limit of the slowly converging series from a finite number of its initial terms, providing

37

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
an accurate estimate of the integral's true value. The evolved code correctly evaluated 17 out of 19 held-out integrals to within a fractional error of less than 3 percent (Supplementary Fig. S20).
The evolved code always applies quad() first. It only falls back to its more specialized methods if quad() returns a large error estimate, returns NaN or Inf, or raises an exception. This means the evolved code is as accurate as quad() in less pathological cases and so could reasonably be used as a drop-in replacement.
A.4. Towards Genuine Discovery
Several recent deployments of our core tree-search algorithm demonstrate the potential for genuine discovery:
Ę Mathematical Discovery Our system was recently used to derive the exact analytical power spectrum of gravitational radiation emitted by cosmic strings84. Operating without empirical data or predictive modeling, the system's search navigated the space of symbolic mathematics to discover six novel analytical derivations to an integral that had not been previously solved, yielding a closed-form exact solution.
Ę Neural Mechanisms: In computational neuroscience, the system was tasked with discovering transition models of neural activity in an in silico larval zebrafish85. While unconstrained search yielded predictive models relying on statistical shortcuts, providing the system with structural priors (wiring diagrams) allowed the algorithm to autonomously discover the true, underlying mechanisms governing the neural circuit, successfully recovering causal effective connectivity.
Within predictive modeling tasks, the scoring schemes are by construction standardized and straightforward to implement. Yet, when applying this automated framework to novel, open-ended scientific domains, inventing an appropriate scoring metric requires significant domain expertise and scientific creativity. We illustrate how this can work for mathematical discovery84, with the objective of discovering a closed-form analytical equation for the radiation spectra of cosmic strings. Our scoring metric measured how closely a proposed analytical solution matches a high-precision numerical solution: the system evaluated the AI-proposed analytical formulas at random physical parameter values and computed the residual difference against the numerical integration. Minimizing this difference lets the search discover six different analytical solutions and also a novel asymptotic expansion. In general, the design of metrics for complex scientific problems is an iterative endeavor. The scientific process implicitly includes creating scoring functions to try to reach a hypothesized goal, iterating when the goal is not reached. Within ERA, this requires that the user iterates the scoring function.
A.5. Computational Cost and Resource Utilization
Since search-based LLM optimization relies on iterative generation and empirical evaluation, it is inherently more resource-intensive than single-shot or zero-shot prompting. Here we detail representative computational costs required per search node for representative search runs across our evaluated benchmarks in Supplementary Table S1.
38

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Supplementary Figures
a
CELLxGENE

Diabetic Kidney Disease

GTEX v9

HypoMap

Immune Cell Atlas

Mouse Pancreatic Islet Atlas

Tabula Sapiens

OpenProblems.bio Holdout Datasets
...

ffdaa1f0-b1d1-4135 -8774-9fed7bf039b

...

a

Training Split n=20,000

Validation Split
n=20,000

b Generate prompt with method description

Base Method

Method Description

Tree search prompt with
method description

Seed Tree Search with the prompt 3 replicas
Tree search hill climbing

Training Split n=20,000

Tree Search Replica 1 Tree Search Replica 2 Tree Search Replica 3

Identify a top node based on hill climbing score

Training Split n=20,000

Method script from top node:
def eliminate_batch_effect_fn(adata): sc.pp.normalize_total(adata) ...

Tree Search Replica 1 Tree Search Replica 2 Tree Search Replica 3
Select the best implementation based on validation score
Validation Split
n=20,000

Tree Search Replica 1 Tree Search Replica 2 Tree Search Replica 3 Evaluate the best implementation on the holdout datasets

OpenProblems.bio Holdout Datasets
Final score
Supplementary Fig. S1 | Experimental design for single-cell batch integration. a, We sourced our tree search development dataset from CELLxGENE. After filtering and manually selecting the dataset 364bd0c7-f7fd-48ed-99c1-ae26872b1042 version ffdaa1f0-b1d1-4135-8774-9fed7bf039ba (see Methods), which has a similar profile to the six datasets used in the OpenProblems.bio Batch Integration benchmark (distinct datasets also in CELLxGENE), we sampled 20,000 cells for the training split and 20,000 for the validation split. b, For each of the 11 base methods, we generated a detailed method description and inserted it into a prompt to initialize the tree search. We ran three independent tree search replicas per method, using the training split for hill climbing. From each tree, we selected the top-performing node based on its training score. We then evaluated each top node's script on the validation split and selected the best one based on validation performance. The best implementation per method was finally evaluated on the OpenProblems.bio holdout datasets, and the corresponding scores are reported as final results.
39

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Supplementary Fig. S2 | Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection86 of BBKNN (TS) on the Immune Cell Atlas dataset. a, The UMAP projection colored by cell type shows cell-type-specific clusters. b, The UMAP projection colored by data batch shows good batch mixing across the dataset.

0.6

Base method (hyperparameter optimized) Tree search

0.5

Overall score

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

BBKNN

ComBat Harmony

LIGER

No advice SCALEX Scanorama TabVI
Method

bfaastctMheNloNr mbnantcChoerrloerct

scVI

Supplementary Fig. S3 | Relative performance of base methods with optimized hyperparameters and ERA replicates. Overall scores on the holdout OpenProblems datasets for all replicates of methods evaluated in Fig. 2. Hyperparameters for the base methods were optimized using the training dataset. For tree search implementations, three replicates of the full process were performed. Dots indicate the overall score of the replicate on the holdout OpenProblems datasets. The bar shows the performance of the replicate with highest performance in the validation dataset (identical values to those shown in Fig. 2). The No advice and TabVI methods have no base method code available. The batchelor mnnCorrect hyperparameter-optimized base method code failed to compute embeddings on every OpenProblems dataset owing to out-of-memory errors.

40

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

1.00 0.98

Method Base method (TS) Recombination (TS)

0.96

Deep Research (TS)

0.94

0.92

0.90

CNCHsbbBbSBbsBNLTbsCbLGbsHHTbHTDHSNSbssLHSSCsbCsLbbCLLSBSHCSBTHCEbLTSBLCHSNBHCbCCsLbMSCHLHCPHHbCsaaaaaccccccccccIIIIIIIIIIsnaCccaaaaCaCCaCaaCaaacCaaCaaBBBBBBBoVoooooooooooooooooaaaayaaaaaiaaaiNGGGGGGGGGGuefbbbbbVVVVVVVVVVeaaattttttttttttttttsmmmmnmmmmmmmmmAAAAAAAAAbrrrrrrrrrrrrKKKKKKKflNEEEEEEEEEEccccccccccccccccraaaaVVVVVuuIIIIIIIIIImmmmmmmmmmmmtennntrELLLLLLLLNNNNNNNaihhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhRRRRRRRRRRBBBBBBBBBBBBBddddrdxx(xxx(x(xIIIIIsimooo-EEEEEEEEdrooooooooooooaTTTNNNNNNNDeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeivvvvCaaaaaaaaaaaaax(x((orrrcoXXXXXXXXxxxx(((xxxTbNSBSbnnnnnnnnnnnnsSSSbTTTllllllllllllllllaaaiiiiittttttttttttth-OyTTTooooooooooooooooaccccnx(xxx((stSNaCacByyyyyyyyyyyyLSSS)))lommmNBSsTSb((x(xxxxTTTciSSSie(xx(xxxxxxx(xrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrbeeeecTacttcavTTTA)))aoKTTTcSbTNlCcaSSSB((xxxxx(xxxx)))ccroaVaaamfmfmffmfffmffmfeanaNTbBSebabTsSLHbSNBSSSbVTTT(((xSSSLNiacaaaaaaaaaaathh)))oAKadamaITTTlnocacIeBNbSLTSsbBbcaacC)))EaoVBSSS)))Iaoa(((ntssssssssssnnnnnnNGLeebSdLvNabVVSSSacroITTTthaclaacCaVttdXBK)))AttttttttttonIrKioeGnnnnnnllaEciaVcvEccbnVaVA)))nMMMMMMMMMMhrNImSSSaoonedttcvIANKoLraNCCCCCChmaaXhhdiEccRaVdIaoIeIEnrr)))leoavciErNNNNNNNNNNLNrNooemcNnhhooooooeevRdtvrIlaonermiamfEXooreNNNNNNNNNNnclaNrrrrrroeeillaaivmoricooacrrrrrrXrernymarllmamsnieeeeeereoorrecxxx(x(x(xxagamtmnTTTccccccrreamnMammfSNBSLTbttttttCaSSSnanfmaNInaCcaBsan)))x(((xxooGnCbTTTattnsNnAnrKCMEcNTSoaVSSSrntCnCLNaehMoRrcdI)))ooNECorobcNeravreNrXNrortaVlnairecrocNrdeImeotcrrevcecrtamatitccmtennaCorrect

Method batchelborabtfHacbtCaSaBhrcsaboCLtteHBhIablAmcmtCbaseMKaGoLlobhrctoBacrNNEEboantecbbbhabVltrmacmyNtIXNRsaaaehacotmlottthtBcrecxxxxxxxhnolnmcccNcbbbeaVfrHlhenyotIonhhhaaahlbbbbbbbCaSraofeHttteeenCleCBoaaaaaaarrsxxxlllaolCacccSCatttttttrLtooCoCBBfrIoooTHsdoomrhhhcccccccACrmbMbbfLHmrrrtoanorrsCaMKBavITGeeeLnhhhhhhhrotfAaaaimuCaSHalllrBmsbceafolrHsMKrtttNNEEnreeeeeeGeLLscmtnCHaooaSSStCooocammmlllllllIBiCVVabcSLeatcccHiarmNNsrrrtyEINIteXNRECIocccmBnB-rssnnnooooooAoMmcaoeCNNNstaVVhhhCGmoLstMofffrrrrrrraaaatyINItXNRHHHtrBcGrPLBmInnnoxxxxxxxxxxDooooimNeeerEtABmcnMLiCCCaaaSSSmlllsnnnaaaaaNErEsVoMKInCCCvxxxxxxxxxGLBBBBsarrrorymNtIRsssVSSSSSSSSSSaaaoooComooeoooNmmmmmmmBCCCxcenyNtIXRLLLtttoooeNNGccEEarrrrrronBBBccccccccccIIITTTddduVcannnnnnnBrrrEHNNAAANNNNxNNNxxxxVrymmmNtmmmEhaaaaaaityNtIXNRfffrrrnsssaaaaaaaaaaxxxxxxMMMKKKHLvvvidAayGGGnLLLDnnnnnnnooooooooooooiiiiBBBbbbccceeeytRaxaaxxSSSSSnnnnnnnnnnaecsNNNNNNoEEEEbfEEExxxxxxxxCCcccCCCCCmmmmnnnBBBBBBrssscccaaa-faaaaaaaaaiVVVVVVrooooooooooaCCCCCaeLLLxxxtttotttyyyiooooooIIINNNIIttIteeeXXXNNNRRRaaalrrrrrrrrrrrBBBBBBLIIITTTTTTTTuddddddddCdnrrrrrrrAAAAAmd(((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaanrrrrrrrsssamsMKMMKKKKKGvvvvvvvvyvaGGGLLLLLiVioiiiiiiiiiTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTtTTTbbcbbbbbbcceeeeeeecbbNNNNNNNNNNEEEEEEEEnoAcccmmccccclclmmmmmmmmOnocccccccSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSVVVVVVVVVVVegtIIttteNtItyetXNRa)))a)))IIIeIINNeIIeeXNXXeNNReea)R)I)NeXNra)))aa)))a))))))a)))a)))lea)))n)))NTE

Supplementary Fig. S4 | Heatmap of text embedding cosine similarities among ERA-generated methods. The similarity matrix was hierarchically clustered along rows and columns and reordered to group similar methods together. Three distinct color bars denote major method categories. The pairwise cosine similarities between tree search-generated solutions were greater than 0.85. For context, the lower bound of cosine similarity, established by averaging the similarities between GIFT-Eval's methods (a completely different benchmark) and batch integration methods, was 0.74.
41

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Non-deep-learning methods Deep-learning-based methods 2

0

UMAP2

2

4

6

4

2 UM0AP1 2

4

6

Supplementary Fig. S5 | UMAP of text embeddings representing ERA-generated methods for single-cell batch integration. The UMAP shows two major clusters: non-deep-learning methods (blue) and deep-learning-based methods (green). We confirmed this clustering by using Gemini to classify the code associated with each method.

42

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Fig. S6 | Performance of retrospective COVID-19 hospitalization forecasts across all replicates. Each panel displays the average WIS by reference date for individual replicates of our proposed models, for all rolling validation dates. Lower WIS values indicate superior forecasting accuracy and calibration. The consistent trends across replicates demonstrate the robustness and reproducibility of tree search's ability to generate high-performing probabilistic forecasts.
43

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Supplementary Fig. S7 | Visual validation of COVID-19 hospitalization forecasts. Comparison of

ground truth (Observed Data) against the CovidHub-ensemble, the lowest WIS recombination

solution (CEPH-Rtrend_covid ū CMU-climate_baseline), and the Google Retrospective (TS) across

five representative jurisdictions (CA, DC, FL, NY, OK). The ERA-developed models demonstrate a

visible qualitative improvement in tracking non-linear dynamics and providing better-calibrated

prediction intervals. This comparison confirms that the numerical improvements in WIS are driven by

superior predictive accuracy across diverse temporal regimes, rather than statistical artifacts or a bias

toward low-constant values.

44

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Fig. S8 | Full-season COVID-19 forecasts across all validation splits. Comparison between the CovidHub-ensemble (left) and the Google Retrospective (TS) model (right). The overlapping colored ribbons represent successive 6-week validation splits throughout the 2024-2025 season.
(a) Oklahoma
(b) Puerto Rico
(c) Texas
45
(d) New York

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Fig. S9 | Heatmap of conceptual similarities among COVID-19 forecasting generated codes for methods. This figure displays the pairwise cosine similarities between text embeddings of all forecasting models generated by tree search for the COVID-19 prediction task. Text embeddings were produced using a Gemini model66. The similarity matrix was then hierarchically clustered and reordered to group conceptually related strategies. The color-coded sidebar categorizes each method by its origin illustrating the composition of the emergent conceptual clusters. The No Advice methods are from the Google Retrospective study.
46

47

Supplementary Fig. S10 | Performance of recombination experiments for COVID-19 forecasting. Average WIS across all evaluated models on the common held-out test set. This extended plot highlights the full distribution of search outcomes, including the 9 Tree Search generated models and 3 external models that performed worse than the CovidHub-baseline (indicated by red bars). Models are color-coded by strategy: base methods, CovidHub submissions, and Tree Search optimized variants (Base method, Recombination, Deep Research, and AI co-scientist).

Rtrend covid x CMU-climate_baselilniemate_baseline x EUPMHa-siRsets-rgxebnOdq_RrCTovJiHdUx-nCbMxU-TimeSeries

Ensemble311 CMUCIJ-EHcPUCUlHMC_J-iCUMCRmH-USMtSaUJ-TSUCrtS_CHcUi-MeECeECEUlmMcUnE-S-P-i_le-d-PCbSCHmCCiCs_TDHSEOaS-aEmSeSci-eS-tSsRPaHSrSoeCmRUeCeECotHEtleEivEteMTpMieMSr-_remlir-SnEUO_e-aRSeEesJbedeCeiC-mbnstuDEaPHnnsnMrSxneTdxaUsrtsC_xeUdsEdUeiSSJ_sieRHJ-eNeOJbHEE-He-erMeeceEJHHtcnamEleHC-HnrHninTeTc-ipsmrUoClHrGidrUUACUeSUeSesosibxeopvioeiUb-OUenoEd__bJ_UESRxCSrU_vskmxeuieaons_enlovcLvuIc_nUHCPCeaIEiGCCneMCddsmweaCkeadSetloCCEptsUMxMrdHMEStCrCSM-lSS-SAdbrsl_iIOvCoxisxPMxxL-ceebaNUOU-xeS-ixOCCSsrMOxoDSlcsS-KiMUtUoSmUrhUMUnUC-mTrr-ARsBBaeESE-vUfEo-eeAUEUdUUlUMfUHieUaMMMUScMobIEMCIiberdcUUtePisls-SSvM-daMMae--ecMMal-vax-tiMxxiSeh-dMMaldTlIHuMr-iSaSCaCJ--carCaSdTapC--isOiasDaaDseTdanDpHc-iedEeaatpESskSIsADxD6lGiHSOxmOOlSDedsDv_sses-HeateRtRHuugmxtnnsHxstsxBsSE_emNlRLaxSxUHebisetuS--eeHHsSRsiaTeteiabDda--sJsTeepeNtEU-UTE-aosuTEaeat-tUlpEaTe-vreTpvpUTtv-aaUcUeUeUS-eEoJHpaTMsr_bM-SEJEErpAIMGO-breapeneOecOMJerearpMeMJM_emrongeatHai-OlIIEla6nUOJNnauEnMrE-6rOSoEsH_slu6bua6abaarngHllmlbsbNUsbiueSnes_sNuDHstndvs6iDi-_uen_stTatss-uxsiiSUssFUnsaesl-eqtpTsiec-osd_stasbabUsepptsCasleHbnSbnesseC-Lesspd-epd-g-nedmrobosArm-cn-ee-brt--ooaaermbe-enkOrs-rAm-SeooG-bgHPmnne(abloNbgborbmgaoMegrtmoil(isgrmeb(bge(e(VlaooTlbTtrxebOI(bblxxGAlPvlbllie(ba(bleniATbibTnolTTbeblilaialbTiSIqTGiDdTeoVeiClTxlDxeeeeanSqkaPadnCPaSSzleSsnaennlo)sSeSkkearIedDSTddIeeede)rdM)drkgr)kra)SCee))nder)es)d

x

pxqu-

bag

yonn



Error (Average WIS) R1F111

N

22 Base method
20
18 16

000Al co-scientist (TS)

XX Deep Research (TS)

Recombination (TS)

CovidHub - Base method (TS)

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

JHUM_UC-STCSiEUTmEEPiCMe-CC-HmE-SCCCMaMC-ePeDSsMUEUSRSHreeUS--Pet-Sile-C-EUTTrHbreREicTpiE_iMviisetnlidPOiERmme-enriEmdEHunesexDedxemFn-xtsSxen_OSRaJsxJJRybeecdJcOeetteHHHtoIIrrGmr_eroH-pCmUUvrUHmHioebic_evSoUOinb_Le_eeUohblanoiuUdCu_aLlnCCsCsgadvenkClGdI_tCedCSXSdsl_SCtiMAMecxECbSxrxxlxSSexceSedSS_UUxCoiNxceCrSSlSorEEf-eEBS-UUvOUUoUTOeRifEvSsUEx-lc-eR-cMiME-vMMMI-enaaiU-M-ulCEheCdalCixS--CaatC-eSScdkMcaiCaCStsSidSCrMDssCMtDCTamavsxCSSrSsOSmoxIUSxsuseUSIe-asissx-oSESsaEa-EH-E--eaSEUSettoU-sapsUE_Etl_TNaMTa_UpTeNM-ErTpeMra-nMSEeoiErTiarEM_IOaaTGcO6arSgiEaEnm6nmIs6bNIlantusIEN_usT6mbpsbnnse_eaSss_FSiHsssStpNnut-soqasssSepsSvLT-eepUs-eTolb-M-pbssor-eeeeeoeAmng-om--oag-mrAAoeglreglmrseormbbHobtlna(bM(lbPoeegbeibminbiligblGilTeTlbbqiAlSlqAanalqnzeeeloSSiPlenxroePreCekegkar)ssd)neCdeeddSd

27.5 25.0

Base method

Error (Avveerage WIS)

20.0 17.5 15.0 12.5
CMU-CcElPiHm-aRtJteHr_Ueb_naCdsS_eCSclMEoHiU-vnT-Ciec1dSIl0xSiHMxx.EmUUUC_a0--MMtEtTnaUeinibs-m_smsxcebe-dSlaSaeCsixerreMmr6iUlUaCi_eiMtE-epnaPeTsoxesHios-bxmxUlaR-eMeCJstaadSeHrrslUe6sin-ndpea_orco6ol_vepidodolxeJdHU

CovidHub

Base method (TS)

Recombination (TS)

XX Deep Research (TS)

Al co-scientist (TS)

CMU-TimmeeSesreineessMxUE-UTHMia-amRsRsetstSsr-re-egergnbnidodqe_rsccoxo(vvTiiSdd)(T(1S5))

RReeggimiemSewsiwUtiMctahcsihsni-anaDgreD6OtHe_HetTpcTeotCJcJoiMHuHloUoUUenJ---dCcHnnloUxbbiv_xxmiUGCdSaddMoSStHa(oSEeuTsgE-_Sbbsl-)bC--e-CaSee_gsSSnnSbeSEssAqlEeleri_mE-mAnEnEdbenvnslsexseereemsOmmbaUHbblrMllTeiaeeaJs(lHsTR(US-eT)a-McraUnl6-bi_cxblpMdrioMeammoettaaltiatteoaEeednEn_TnsbT(bsTeaSaems)smeebblll_liieCennrSeeS(EUET-SM-CF)CaaSsiSsUrEE-Mn_geaEEsbsnnsasAssr-weeaMadmrOrRbbeBSoO_Sp-p-toGCiCLmoiEvzaiAetdMiHounb

JHU CSSE-CSSE EJnHsemble x OHT JHU-nb le d
b-basCeOliVnIeD

Supplementary Fig. S11 | Validation performance for COVID-19 forecasting. Average WIS for models evaluated on the six-week rolling validation window covering the reference dates 2025-02-22 to 2025-03-29. Performance on the validation dates correlates with the held-out test set results; for instance, the best-performing test model (CEPH-Rtrend_covid x CMU-climate_baseline) was identified as the second-best performer during this validation phase.

48

y Hospital AdAmiss Apr 26 Apr 05

ita Apr 26 May 10 May 17 Apr 26 May 03 May 10 May 17

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

1000 800

CovidHub-ensemble

COVID-19 Hospitalization Forecasts Comparison (CA)

CEPH-Rtrend_covid x CMU-climate_baseline
1000

1000

800

800

Google Retrospective (TS)

Observed Data
95% Prediction Interval 80% Prediction Interval 50% Prediction Interval Model Forecast

600

400
We 200

400 200

400 200

Mar 22

Mar 29

Apr 05

Apr 12

Apr 19 Date

May 03

May 10

May 17

 Mar 22

Mar 29

Aoprr12

Apr 19 Date

Apr 26

May 03

May 10

May 17

Mar 22

Mar 29

COVID-19 Hospitalization Forecasts Comparison (DC)

Apr 05

Apr 112

Apr19 Date

Apr 26

May 03

May 10

May 117

CovidHub-ensemble

CEPH-Rtrend_covid x CMU-climate_baseline

Google Retrospective (TS)

120 100
80 60 4400 20

120 100
80 60 40 20

120 100
80 60 40 20

Observed Data
95% Prediction Interval 80% Prediction Interval 50% Prediction Interval Model Forecast

Mar 22

Mar 29

Apr 05

Apr 12

Apr 19 Date

May 03

May 10

May 17

Mar 22

Mar 29

Apprr0O5

Apr 12

Apr 19 Date

Apr 2

May 03

Mar 27

Mar 29

COVID-19 Hospitalization Forecasts Comparison (FL)

Apr 05

Apr 12

Apr 19 Date

CovidHub-ensemble

CEPH-Rtrend_covid x CMU-climate_baseline

Google Retrospective (TS)

800 700 600 500 400 300 200 100

800 700 600 500 400 300 200 100

800 700 600 500
300 200 100

Mar 22

Mar 29

Apr 05

Apr 12

Apr 19 Date

Apr 26

May 03

May 10

May 17

Mar 22

Mar 29

Aporr 05

Aoprr 112

Apr 19 Date

Apr 2

May 03

May 10

May 17

Mar 22

Mar 29

Apr 05

Apr 12

Aoprr119 Date

Apr226

May 03

Mtaavy10

May 117

COVID-19 Hospitalization Forecasts Comparison (NY)

Observed Data
95% Prediction Interval 80% Prediction Interval 50% Prediction Interval Model Forecast

nital Ad
Apr 26

1400 1200
1000 800 600 400 200

CovidHub-ensemble

1400 1200 1000
800 600 400 200

CEPH-Rtrend_covid x CMU-climate_baseline

1400 1200 1000
800 600 400 200

Google Retrospective (TS)

Observed Data
95% Prediction Interval 80% Prediction Interval 50% Prediction Interval -Model Forecast

Mar 22

Mar 29

Apr 05

Apr 12

Apr 19 Date

May 03

May 10

May 17

Mar 22

Mar 29

Apr 05

Apr 12

Apr 19 Date

Apr 26

May 03

May 10

May 17

Mar 22

Mar 29

Apr 05

AAnprr112

Apr19 Date

Apr 26

May 03

May 10

May117

Supplementary Fig. S12 | Examples of COVID-19 forecasts. Observed ground truth data (black line) plotted against predictive models across four major jurisdictions (CA, DC, FL, and NY) for the reference dates 2025-04-05, 2025-04-12, and 2025-04-19. These dates are used as the held out test set in the analysis in the paper. Columns represent the CovidHub-ensemble (left), the best-performing tree search (TS) discovered recombination model (CEPH-Rtrend_covid x CMU-climate_baseline, middle), and the Google Retrospective TS model (right). The average WIS for this period are 11.63 for the top recombination model, 12.85 for the CovidHub-ensemble, and 14.39 for the Google Retrospective model. The TS methods generate significantly narrower confidence bands--indicating higher predictive precision--while consistently containing the ground truth data.
49

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Fig. S13 | Categories of solutions on the GIFT-Eval benchmark on the per-dataset solution (v1). We prompted an LLM (Gemini 2.5 Pro) to categorize the code from each of the solutions into a class of methods. The figure shows the percentage of the best codes for each of the 92 competitions in the specified categories: Gradient Boosted Method (GBM); Ensemble; Seasonal; Error, Trend and Seasonality (ETS); Arima87; Linear; Averaging; Decomposition and Unobserved components model (UCM).
50

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Fig. S14 | Example output segmenting DLRSD image pixels from ERA Solution 1 (U-Net++).
51

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Maximum Score

0.9

0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3

Node #190 Adjusted decoder dropout regularization.

Node #549 Upgraded U-Net encoder to ResNeXt101.

Node #130 Implemented Test-Time Augmentation for robust predictions.
Node #102 Extended training, L2 regularization, refined LR schedule.
Node #88 Upgraded U-Net encoder to SE-ResNeXt50.
Node #77 Diverse data augmentations, refined loss weighting.
Node #49 Upgraded U-Net encoder to EfficientNet-B4 backbone.
Node #28 Introduced combined Dice and Cross-Entropy loss.
Node #15 Combined Dice and Cross-Entropy loss.

Node #717 Winner.

0

200

400

600

800

1000

Number of Nodes

#0 nan

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5

#6

#7

#8

-inf

0.226 -inf 0.421 0.421 -inf

-inf 0.0028

#9

#10

0.485

-inf

#15 0.632

#14

#18

#23

#21

#12

-inf 0.661 -inf 0.641 -inf

#11

#16

#17

#19

-inf 0.0106 0.599 -inf

#20

#22

#24

#25

0.62 0.645 0.559 0.678

#26

#13

0.663 0.0067

#28 0.704

#33

#29

#30

#32

#36

#37

#34

#35

#38

0.709 -inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf

-inf 0.406 -inf

#27

#31

#39

#40

#42

#43

#45

#46

#41

#44

-inf

-inf

-inf 0.686 -inf

-inf 0.714 0.667 0.655 0.651

#47 0.735

#48 0.697

#49 0.756

#50

#51

#52

#54

0.715 0.69

-inf 0.703

#53

#55

0.693 -inf

#56

#57

#59

#61

-inf 0.716 0.713 0.686

#62

#66

#72

#58

#64

#65

#67

-inf

0.68

-inf

-inf 0.755 0.742 0.682

#70 0.752

#63 0.738

#60 0.732

#68 0.532

#69 0.715

#71 0.726

#77 0.769

#79 0.771

#81

#84

#76

#82

0.76 0.763 0.752 0.763

#78

#80

#83

#74

0.755 0.76

-inf

0.76

#73

#75

0.695 -inf

#89

#91

#93

#96

#97

#98

#88

#95

#99

#90

#92

#85

#86

0.774 -inf 0.763 0.762 -inf 0.773 0.778 -inf 0.748 0.771 0.779 0.75 0.763

#87 0.765

#106 0.781

#108 0.782

#109 0.775

#101 0.779

#104 0.782

#103 0.771

#100 -inf

#102 0.793

#107 0.791

#94 0.756

#105 0.768

#116 #117 #122 0.789 -inf 0.785

#118 0.774

#110 0.789

#111 0.764

#114 0.775

#115 0.782

#112 0.788

#113 0.785

#119 0.786

#121 0.792

#124 0.781

#131 0.788

#137 0.774

#135 0.791

#123 0.779

#127 0.78

#126 0.782

#120 0.778

#128 0.78

#125 0.79

#130 0.794

#133 0.785

#134 0.784

#136 -inf

#138 0.783

#164 0.787

#154 -inf

#152 0.784

#153 -inf

#155 0.788

#156 -inf

#139 0.786

#129 0.787

#132 0.781

#141 0.789

#142 0.776

#143 0.79

#145 -inf

#146 0.782

#147 0.764

#151 0.782

#157 0.783

#148 0.789

#150 0.779

#140 0.777

#144 -inf

#149 0.792

#162 0.79

#163 0.787

#178 0.767

#158 -inf

#159 0.787

#160 0.797

#161 0.771

#177 0.793

#179 0.794

#165 0.778

#166 -inf

#167 0.795

#168 0.762

#169 -inf

#170 -inf

#171 0.795

#197 0.787

#198 0.787

#172 -inf

#173 0.8

#174 -inf

#175 -inf

#176 0.797

#180 -inf

#181 0.796

#182 0.795

#183 -inf

#184 0.787

#185 0.79

#233 0.803

#245 0.796

#186 -inf

#187 0.801

#188 0.796

#189 0.788

#191 -inf

#190 0.801

#192 0.791

#248 0.802

#249 0.795

#253 0.797

#256 -inf

#260 0.792

#193 -inf

#194 0.8

#196 0.792

#195 0.799

#199 0.799

#200 0.801

#201 0.798

#202 0.8

#262 0.797

#263 0.793

#265 0.799

#267 0.8

#203 0.797

#205 0.793

#229 0.799

#236 0.799

#204 0.795

#216 0.798

#207 0.762

#214 0.797

#223 0.796

#206 0.799

#209 0.796

#213 -inf

#217 0.797

#247 0.8

#208 -inf

#220 0.795

#210 -inf

#212 0.799

#215 -inf

#221 0.796

#277 0.801

#279 0.801

#211 0.775

#240 -inf

#241 0.798

#242 -inf

#246 -inf

#252 0.8

#226 0.798

#231 0.791

#227 -inf

#218 0.798

#219 0.796

#222 -inf

#228 0.796

#261 0.792

#266 -inf

#224 0.789

#225 0.797

#237 0.792

#232 -inf

#287 -inf

#290 0.794

#305 -inf

#292 -inf

#293 0.802

#259 0.802

#264 0.801

#276 0.79

#238 -inf

#243 0.795

#234 0.793

#235 0.802

#230 -inf

#244 -inf

#239 0.8

#309 0.795

#310 0.802

#312 0.789

#269 0.798

#271 -inf

#273 -inf

#274 0.794

#281 0.795

#278 0.796

#280 0.795

#282 0.8

#250 -inf

#251 -inf

#254 0.799

#258 -inf

#255 0.797

#257 0.801

#320 0.804

#321 0.792

#323 0.797

#328 0.796

#296 0.799

#268 0.797

#270 0.8

#272 0.801

#275 0.803

#329 -inf

#330 0.794

#331 0.793

#332 0.798

#333 0.801

#334 0.804

#335 0.802

#337 0.801

#340 0.8

#344 -inf

#283 -inf

#284 0.804

#285 0.798

#295 0.801

#286 0.8

#288 -inf

#289 0.8

#291 0.801

#294 0.797

#345 0.802

#346 0.8

#348 0.787

#349 0.783

#350 0.793

#354 0.798

#360 0.8

#362 0.796

#368 0.797

#370 0.798

#372 0.797

#376 -inf

#377 0.798

#378 -inf

#383 0.799

#384 0.794

#387 0.787

#388 0.8

#389 0.795

#401 0.803

#347 0.804

#351 0.799

#363 0.8

#297 0.788

#298 0.804

#299 -inf

#300 0.799

#302 0.796

#304 -inf

#307 0.797

#311 0.79

#319 0.795

#308 0.799

#301 -inf

#303 -inf

#306 0.801

#355 0.803

#356 0.797

#364 0.8

#413 0.8

#416 0.798

#421 0.795

#438 -inf

#459 0.802

#357 0.799

#358 0.789

#359 0.8

#361 0.802

#369 0.797

#385 0.8

#313 0.797

#314 0.8

#315 0.796

#317 0.801

#318 0.8

#322 0.796

#324 0.797

#325 0.796

#326 0.795

#336 0.781

#341 0.802

#342 0.8

#316 -inf

#365 0.801

#366 0.796

#367 -inf

#371 -inf

#379 0.803

#471 -inf

#473 0.801

#373 -inf

#374 0.8

#375 0.799

#386 0.8

#339 -inf

#327 0.796

#338 -inf

#343 0.792

#352 0.8

#353 0.791

#382 0.799

#380 -inf

#381 0.802

#390 0.796

#392 -inf

#394 0.803

#396 0.805

#397 0.797

#399 0.804

#403 0.8

#402 -inf

#391 -inf

#393 0.802

#395 0.798

#398 0.799

#400 0.802

#404 0.803

#405 0.796

#407 0.779

#408 0.8

#409 -inf

#410 0.8

#419 0.794

#427 0.8

#429 0.801

#434 -inf

#435 0.799

#437 0.802

#440 0.802

#445 0.798

#446 0.794

#460 -inf

#462 0.798

#463 0.802

#411 0.805

#414 0.795

#417 -inf

#420 0.801

#406 0.794

#412 0.801

#433 0.803

#415 0.8

#418 0.799

#430 0.795

#455 0.8

#449 0.796

#452 -inf

#450 0.799

#451 0.799

#457 0.798

#475 0.803

#422 -inf

#423 0.799

#424 0.798

#425 -inf

#426 0.802

#428 0.801

#431 0.789

#436 -inf

#439 -inf

#441 0.796

#461 0.799

#432 -inf

#447 0.793

#448 0.801

#453 0.805

#484 0.793

#487 0.796

#442 0.799

#443 0.802

#444 0.798

#458 0.8

#464 -inf

#465 0.801

#466 0.802

#467 0.801

#470 0.8

#472 0.805

#474 0.801

#478 0.801

#479 0.801

#480 -inf

#481 0.801

#454 0.797

#456 0.803

#477 0.798

#482 0.802

#483 0.802

#485 0.806

#486 0.799

#493 0.801

#494 0.799

#468 -inf

#469 0.8

#476 0.804

#495 0.798

#491 0.777

#502 0.798

#504 0.798

#506 0.802

#512 0.803

#517 0.8

#488 0.805

#489 0.802

#490 0.797

#492 0.805

#515 0.807

#523 -inf

#548 -inf

#496 0.805

#497 -inf

#499 0.803

#500 0.8

#501 0.802

#498 0.798

#503 0.804

#505 0.799

#510 0.801

#518 0.795

#526 0.801

#528 0.793

#531 0.8

#534 0.802

#537 0.803

#540 0.801

#554 0.798

#507 0.804

#508 0.796

#511 0.804

#516 -inf

#509 0.802

#513 0.806

#514 0.805

#550 0.8

#519 0.8

#520 0.803

#524 0.799

#521 0.797

#522 0.797

#525 0.797

#529 0.807

#532 0.802

#536 0.794

#539 0.802

#527 -inf

#530 -inf

#533 0.8

#538 0.798

#551 0.802

#535 0.796

#541 -inf

#542 0.805

#543 0.803

#544 -inf

#545 -inf

#546 0.806

#549 0.811

#552 0.808

#547 0.805

#553 0.775

#555 -inf

#556 -inf

#558 0.798

#557 0.801

#561 0.802

#564 0.804

#569 0.806

#574 0.806

#562 0.806

#563 0.81

#567 -inf

#570 0.809

#572 0.788

#565 0.804

#566 0.803

#568 -inf

#571 -inf

#573 0.803

#559 0.799

#560 0.8

#581 0.804

#584 0.802

#585 0.807

#590 -inf

#594 0.806

#597 0.802

#599 0.804

#577 0.807

#578 -inf

#586 -inf

#579 0.805

#580 -inf

#582 0.791

#591 0.804

#593 0.798

#587 -inf

#588 -inf

#589 -inf

#592 -inf

#575 0.799

#576 -inf

#583 0.789

#601 -inf

#604 0.806

#605 -inf

#606 -inf

#608 0.809

#609 0.811

#610 -inf

#611 0.805

#595 -inf

#596 -inf

#598 0.802

#603 0.801

#600 0.807

#602 0.809

#607 0.806

#620 0.808

#621 0.805

#623 0.803

#628 0.803

#637 -inf

#624 0.807

#625 0.806

#630 0.805

#642 0.804

#612 0.805

#613 0.809

#618 -inf

#614 0.798

#615 -inf

#616 0.804

#617 -inf

#619 -inf

#622 0.805

#631 0.806

#632 0.804

#639 0.804

#640 -inf

#634 0.807

#635 -inf

#638 0.809

#643 -inf

#629 0.805

#626 -inf

#627 0.811

#636 -inf

#644 0.804

#633 0.806

#648 0.808

#658 0.807

#651 0.803

#652 -inf

#653 0.808

#654 0.806

#655 -inf

#656 0.809

#641 0.803

#645 -inf

#646 -inf

#647 0.808

#649 0.81

#657 0.808

#650 0.805

#659 0.807

#664 0.803

#669 0.807

#665 -inf

#666 0.806

#667 0.807

#668 0.806

#673 0.808

#678 0.805

#660 0.807

#663 0.809

#661 -inf

#662 0.805

#677 0.806

#686 0.8

#671 0.804

#674 -inf

#670 0.805

#687 0.805

#684 -inf

#685 0.808

#679 -inf

#680 0.807

#682 -inf

#688 0.808

#689 0.799

#672 -inf

#683 0.808

#675 -inf

#676 0.809

#681 0.809

#693 0.805

#694 -inf

#703 0.803

#691 0.805

#705 0.808

#700 0.804

#701 0.803

#717 0.81

#696 0.805

#699 0.801

#690 -inf

#692 0.8

#695 0.81

#704 0.812

#697 0.804

#698 0.808

#702 0.805

#711 0.808

#714 0.807

#716 -inf

#731 0.808

#732 0.806

#706 0.807

#707 0.808

#708 0.807

#709 -inf

#710 -inf

#718 0.81

#719 0.811

#722 -inf

#723 -inf

#724 0.806

#729 -inf

#712 0.808

#713 0.811

#725 -inf

#726 0.807

#730 0.803

#727 -inf

#741 -inf

#763 -inf

#715 0.805

#721 -inf

#728 -inf

#720 0.808

#738 0.805

#742 0.812

#744 0.802

#739 0.808

#740 0.81

#743 0.808

#733 0.809

#734 0.81

#735 -inf

#737 0.809

#745 0.807

#736 -inf

#754 -inf

#755 -inf

#757 -inf

#759 -inf

#762 -inf

#768 0.806

#752 0.808

#769 0.81

#751 0.807

#753 0.808

#760 -inf

#767 -inf

#756 0.809

#747 0.808

#750 0.807

#764 0.813

#746 -inf

#748 0.806

#761 0.804

#749 0.805

#758 -inf

#772 -inf

#774 0.806

#780 0.807

#783 0.807

#791 0.806

771 0.815

#775 0.803

#776 0.808

#765 0.809

#766 -inf

#773 0.81

#777 0.808

#778 0.809

#785 0.811

#790 0.811

#793 -inf

#781 -inf

#782 0.809

#784 0.808

#788 0.811

#795 0.809

#789 -inf

#779 0.807

#786 0.809

#787 0.81

#794 0.808

#797 -inf

#800 0.807

#801 0.811

#803 -inf

#805 0.81

#809 -inf

#810 0.807

#813 0.812

#820 0.81

#822 0.809

#792 -inf

#799 -inf

#806 0.808

#807 0.813

#811 0.809

#819 0.805

#808 0.804

#796 0.81

#798 0.807

#802 -inf

#804 0.804

#818 -inf

#815 -inf

#816 -inf

#817 0.81

#826 0.808

#831 0.808

#835 0.809

#837 0.806

#839 0.806

#846 0.809

#836 0.811

#845 0.811

#843 -inf

#821 -inf

#823 -inf

#824 0.811

#825 0.807

#830 -inf

#832 0.81

#827 0.809

#812 -inf

#814 -inf

#828 0.81

#829 -inf

#849 -inf

#847 0.808

#857 0.81

#851 0.81

#854 0.809

#856 0.809

#858 0.807

#859 0.81

#862 0.809

#833 0.809

#834 0.805

#840 0.811

#848 -inf

#838 0.806

#841 -inf

#842 0.806

#850 0.81

#870 0.809

#871 0.81

#865 -inf

#866 0.812

#867 0.809

#868 -inf

#875 -inf

#876 0.806

#878 0.81

#877 -inf

#844 -inf

#852 0.81

#853 0.809

#855 0.808

#860 0.807

#863 0.81

#889 0.811

#900 0.812

#880 0.808

#881 -inf

#882 -inf

#883 -inf

#884 0.809

#987 -inf

#885 0.811

#894 0.81

#861 -inf

#869 0.805

#864 0.81

#874 0.806

#879 0.811

#904 0.81

#905 0.81

#907 0.809

#913 0.811

#914 0.809

#916 0.812

#924 0.813

#895 -inf

#897 -inf

#912 0.805

#872 0.811

#873 0.803

#890 0.812

#891 0.809

#919 -inf

#927 0.805

#921 0.809

#925 -inf

#926 -inf

#932 0.812

#933 0.809

#945 0.808

#938 0.812

#940 -inf

#942 -inf

#946 0.811

#955 0.81

#886 0.813

#887 0.81

#888 0.81

#902 0.81

#903 0.807

#906 0.809

#909 0.811

#947 0.807

#948 -inf

#950 0.809

#954 0.812

#957 0.81

#958 0.808

#959 0.808

#962 -inf

#964 0.809

#960 0.808

#961 0.812

#969 -inf

#892 0.808

#893 0.808

#896 0.81

#898 0.809

#965 0.811

#899 -inf

#901 0.813

#922 0.81

#917 0.813

#918 0.808

#967 0.81

#968 0.809

#970 -inf

#971 0.81

#973 0.814

#972 0.811

#978 -inf

#979 0.813

#980 0.811

#981 0.809

#908 -inf

#974 0.813

#975 -inf

#976 0.812

#910 -inf

#911 0.807

#915 0.809

#920 0.811

#923 0.812

#952 -inf

#929 0.81

#930 0.812

#936 0.808

#982 0.815

#992 0.808

#996 -inf

#997 -inf

#998 0.812

#1007 0.811

#984 -inf

#985 -inf

#986 -inf

#999 #1000 #1005 #1003

0.809 0.812 -inf

0.81

#989 0.809

#990 -inf

#991 -inf

#993 0.81

#994 -inf

#995 0.809

#928 0.807

#931 0.807

#956 0.807

#934 0.803

#935 0.806

#937 0.808

#953 0.806

#966 0.804

#983 0.807

#944 -inf

#939 -inf

#943 0.807

#949 -inf

#951 -inf

#963 -inf

#977 -inf

#988 -inf

#1001 #1002 #1004 0.811 0.813 -inf

#1008 0.806

Supplementary Fig. S15 | Breakthrough plot and solution tree for the geospatial segmentation task. Top Figure Breakthrough plot for the U-Net Geospatial DLRSD solution (solution 3), showing the evolution of the maximum score as a function of the number of nodes. The green dots label places where the score abruptly increases due to an improvement in the code, and the label describes the change in the code that resulted in the score increase. Bottom Figure Structure of the tree for this same search. The color range consists of orange (lower scores) to green (higher scores) with the highest score denoted by a diamond node.

52

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

0.035 0.030 0.025 0.020 0.015

1 step ahead

4 steps ahead

8 steps ahead

16 steps ahead

32 steps ahead

short context MAE
Linear Tide
Tsmixer Time-Mix
Unet TS-1-Step
TS TS-Jaxley
Linear Tide
Tsmixer Time-Mix
Unet TS
TS-Jaxley Linear Tide
Tsmixer Time-Mix
Unet TS
TS-Jaxley Linear Tide
Tsmixer Time-Mix
Unet TS
TS-Jaxley Linear Tide
Tsmixer Time-Mix
Unet TS
TS-Jaxley

Supplementary Fig. S16 | Comparison of solutions to time-series and video forecasting methods across conditions on ZAPBench. Solutions are evaluated using average mean absolute error (MAE) across conditions (lower is better). For ERA, we report the performance of three different solutions (blue), and compare them against baselines (red). Alongside our best general solution (TS), we include results from two specialized runs: a tree search that was optimized for 1-step ahead forecasting as well as a solution prompted to use Jaxley, a differentiable biophysical neuron simulator. The dotted and solid lines represent the mean and stimulus baselines, respectively. To account for variability due to random number generator seeding, each method was run three times. We report the mean, with error bars indicating 95% confidence intervals.

Maximum Score

-0.0260

Node #775 Winner.

-0.0265 -0.0270 -0.0275 -0.0280

Node #390 Increased neuron and global state embedding dimensions.
Node #242 Added delta features for temporal rate of change.
Node #168 Moved 1D CNN temporal features into FeatureExtractor.
Node #43 Added 1D convolution layer for temporal context processing.

0

200

400

600

800

Number of Nodes

1000

Supplementary Fig. S17 | Breakthrough plot and solution tree for the ZAPBench task. Top Figure Breakthrough plot for the ZAPBench task, showing the evolution of the maximum score as a function of the number of nodes. The green dots label places where the score abruptly increases due to an improvement in the code, and the label describes the change in the code that resulted in the score increase. Bottom Figure Structure of the tree for this same search. The color range consists of orange (lower scores) to green (higher scores) with the highest score denoted by a diamond node.
53

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

train set 445.001 445.017 447.012 458.031 462.034 477.049 478.036 487.011 487.026 488.014 491.004 491.006 491.014 493.056 495.029 504.057 512.029 512.037 550.003


 sin 2 

0 
 sin 2 cos (2) 

0 
 sin 2 + 2 cos (2) 


0 



+ 2+(+ )2

-

 -  2+(- )2

sin () 

0



  sin ( ) cos ( )

2 + 2

 

0 

  sin ( )+cos ( )

2+1

 

0 

 (cos () -cos ( ) ) sin ( )  



0 


0

1 

(2 cos2

sin ( ) ( )+2 sin2

( ))2

 


1
 0

sin ( ) cos2 ( )
(2 cos2 ( )+2 sin2 ( ))2

 


1
 0

sin3 ( ) cos ( )
(2 cos2 (2 )+2 sin2 (2 ))4

 




cos2

( )

2+2  

0




cos2+1

( )

2+2  

0






sin

(2

)

cos2

(

)

 2 + 2

 

0




sin

(2

)

cos2

(

)

 



0




sin3

( )

sin2

( )

 



0




sin3

( )

cos

( 

)

 

0 


 cos

cos2 ( )

(2 cos

)

+1   2

+

2

2 + 2

 

0




cos

(



)

cos

  2+2

2 + 2

 

0




sin

(



)

coth

(

 2

)

2+1

 

0

test set 446.021 446.045 449.013 465.002 465.013 467.025 478.031 478.050 484.059 487.068 494.006 496.037 504.025 504.061 505.006 505.008 505.023 513.033 551.027


 sin4 2 - sin4 2 

0 
  cos 2 cos (2) 

0 
 -1 sin () cos () 

0




(3-4

sin2

( 

))

sin2

( 

)

 



0




sin2+1

( )

sin

( 

(6+3)

)

2 + 2

 

0 

 sin () cos ()  

0  sin2 ( )+1 

 sin ( ) 

0 
 cos ()  
-+ 

 sin  - 2 + cos  - 2 

0 
 cos ( ) cos ( cos ( ) ) cos (2 ) sinh ( sin ( ) )  

0 
  sin (2) cos 2 

0



0

( 2

cos2

sin3 ( ) ( )+2 sin2

( ))3

1 

 



 sin (  )  



0




sin3

( ) cos ( )

 

0 



sin2 (2 )+1 

 -+ 2+2 sin ( )  

0

2 + 2





sin ( )

0  (2 sin2 ( )+2 cos2 ( ))  



 (cos () -cos ( ) ) sin ( )  



0




sin3

( 

)

cos

(3 )

2

 

0




sin3

( 2  2 )

2 

0

Supplementary Fig. S18 | The dataset of 38 definite integrals with oscillatory integrands on semi-infinite domains82, none of which were solved correctly by scipy.integrate.quad(). Parameters like , ,  were chosen randomly between 0 and 5 with exponents constrained to be integers.

54

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Maximum Score

Node #361

Node #342

Prioritized `x=1/t` transform; adaptive Euler segments

5

Eliminated tangent transformation's harmful endpoint heuristic. Node #411

Node #961 Increased numerical limits, earlier Euler acceleration.

Node #309

Removed problematic integral transformations, prioritized Euler acceleration

Added tangent transformation for infinite integrals.

Node #478

0

Node #282

Removed problematic transformations; prioritized Euler acceleration.

Aggressively increased integration effort and precision checks.

Node #764

Increased initial `quad` limits and reduced Euler segments

-5
Node #234
Euler acceleration applied to negative infinite lower limits.

Node #747 Relaxed `quad` tolerance, optimized segment limits.

-10

Node #161 Transformed infinite limits to finite intervals via tangent.

Node #687 Stronger `scipy.quad` attempts, refined Euler convergence.

Node #119
Maximized `quad` limits and tightened tolerances.
-15 Node #59
Prioritized infinite-to-finite domain transformation.

Node #47

-20

Aggressively tuned `quad` parameters and smarter Euler termination.

Node #617 Accelerated segment growth; earlier Euler engagement.
Node #606 Faster segment growth, earlier Euler convergence.
Node #510 Faster segment growth, fewer segments, looser segment tolerances.

Node #34 Expanded `quad` acceptance, more robust Euler method.

-25

Node #7

Ensured series alternation for Euler acceleration.

0

200

400

600

800

1000

Number of Nodes

#0 nan

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5

#6

#7

#8

#9

#10

#11

-27.8 -inf

-40

-64.5 -60.2

-inf

-19

-66.2

-inf

-16.4

-19

#12

#13

#14

#15

#16

#17

#18

#19

#20

-17

-59

-68.9 -20.4 -66.2 -77.4

-19

-82.8 -68.9

#22

#27

#26

#38

#30

#31

#33

#34

#35

#40

#41

#42

#45

#32

#36

#37

#39

#44

#21

#23

#25

#24

#28

#29

-inf

-68.8 -76.8

-19

-23.7

-inf

-19

-14.9 -67.9

-inf

-inf

-22.2 -54.6 -61.2

-19

-19

-17

-19

-83

-24.1 -79.2 -68.9

-19

-19

#47 -14.6

#48

#49

#50

#51

#54

#55

#56

#57

#59

-30.1

-19

-inf

-inf

-15.9 -15.8

-26

-15.5 -6.72

#60

#61

#52

#53

#58

-9.19

-17

-19

-19

-69.5

#43

#46

-19

-19

#62

#63

#64

#65

#66

#67

-28.5

-29

-14.6 -16.2

-14

-8.76

#68 -14.4

#69 -14.7

#71 -19.4

#79

#75

#72

#73

#74

#78

#85

#76

#77

#80

-16.5 -17.9 -18.7 -inf -6.72 -inf -8.01 -11.1 -16.7

-10

#86

#70

#81

#83

#89

#91

#94

#98

#82

#87

#84

-24

-12.5 -19.7 -20.6 -8.76 -8.76 -8.76

-11

-20.9 -15.5 -14.7

#88 -6.72

#90 -6.72

#92 -6.72

#93 -6.72

#95 -6.72

#96 -10.1

#97 -6.72

#99 -6.72

#100 -6.72

#102 -10

#103 -10

#104 -12.5

#105 -12.5

#101 -25.7

#108 -6.72

#106 -18.3

#116 -24.1

#135 -14.8

#107 -6.72

#109 -6.72

#110 #112 #129 #142 #148 #111 #117 #113 #114 #136 #146 #115 -6.72 -inf -14.5 -10.3 -11.5 -6.72 -12.9 -18.1 -inf -17.2 -77.4 -6.72

#119 -6.52

#128 -11.5

#133 -6.72

#122 -inf

#130 -15.7

#145 -9.02

#121 -18.8

#127 -76.6

#143 -15.7

#118 -13.8

#126 -inf

#132 -67.7

#150 -inf

#123 -inf

#124 -72.9

#134 -6.72

#120 -28.7

#125 -15.3

#131 -9.16

#151 -inf

#152 -11.3

#153 -14.5

#159 -15.4

#162 -12.5

#164 -17.7

#167 -4.34

#170 -inf

#171 -22.1

#172 -6.72

#140 -16.7

#141 -6.72

#144 -6.72

#147 -6.64

#137 -6.72

#138 -inf

#139 -6.58

#149 -6.55

#184 -4.4

#186 -inf

#187 -inf

#194 -6.65

#198 -6.62

#196 -9.03

#156 -17

#160 -35.2

#166 -6.64

#155 -5.75

#158 -18.8

#163 -15.3

#168 -6.72

#154 -11.1

#157 -6.55

#161 -4.3

#165 -6.55

#169 -6.55

#201 -4.4

#203 -4.4

#207 -12.5

#177 -6.64

#173 -14.5

#176 -inf

#179 -11.1

#182 -10.5

#183 -inf

#178 -6.81

#174 -6.4

#181 -16.7

#188 -4.99

#189 -inf

#190 -4.3

#193 -4.3

#195 -16.8

#197 -4.3

#175 -inf

#180 -13.6

#185 -11.1

#191 -9.95

#227 -34.9

#229 -8.48

#192 -11.4

#199 -16

#205 -6.4

#213 -32.9

#212 -inf

#217 -4.3

#232 -4.3

#200 -inf

#202 -4.3

#204 -4.3

#206 -4.3

#208 -inf

#209 -4.3

#210 -4.3

#211 -6.39

#223 -4.3

#221 -inf

#241 -15.4

#267 -4.3

#245 -16.9

#256 -16.5

#215 -4.3

#220 -4.3

#230 -4.3

#216 -4.97

#219 -16.2

#214 -6.4

#218 -4.3

#222 -4.3

#224 -inf

#228 -4.3

#231 -4.3

#225 -4.3

#226 -4.3

#233 -4.3

#237 -4.3

#277 -12.5

#238 -4.3

#242 -4.3

#234 -4.28

#243 -11.8

#244 -6.98

#259 -17

#236 -4.3

#239 -71.6

#247 -4.3

#255 -12.5

#248 -4.3

#250 -22.1

#240 -14.7

#264 -4.3

#235 -16.5

#249 -16.9

#246 -11.2

#262 -4.3

#251 -9.13

#254 -18.1

#252 -19

#260 -25

#265 -4.3

#268 -13.8

#269 -20.6

#270 -17.5

#271 -inf

#274 -4.28

#275 -15.9

#276 -4.28

#281 -inf

#282 -4.28

#283 -27

#253 -4.3

#258 -inf

#257 -15.4

#266 -inf

#261 -15.2

#263 -4.3

#280 -17.5

#273 -4.3

#278 -6.35

#289 -5.61

#292 -6.95

#297 -17.1

#311 -20.3

#314 -19

#300 -4.28

#301 -14.2

#308 -16.8

#312 -46.2

#298 -14.7

#299 -6.56

#305 -4.28

#307 -12.5

#310 -4.28

#313 -4.28

#316 -7.08

#279 -4.3

#284 -4.3

#285 -inf

#286 -16.5

#287 -4.3

#288 -4.3

#320 -inf

#330 -4.28

#319 -15.4

#321 -4.28

#340 -4.28

#323 -4.28

#327 -5.31

#329 -6.36

#344 -19

#324 -4.28

#295 -4.3

#296 -6.96

#290 -4.3

#293 -18

#291 -33.2

#294 -19

#317 -4.3

#360 -4.28

#369 -12.3

#350 -6.95

#359 -17.8

#364 -17.4

#368 -16.8

#353 -4.28

#337 -23.4

#343 -6.53

#302 -17.5

#304 -4.98

#309 -3.5

#315 -3.51

#303 -12.4

#306 -14.7

#318 -18

#322 -4.3

#379 -4.28

#373 -6.58

#374 -inf

#331 -4.29

#332 -4.31

#333 -25.4

#335 -3.5

#342 -2.8

#345 -6.95

#325 -3.51

#326 -71

#328 -16.2

#334 -inf

#397 -4.28

#354 -6.36

#348 -4.47

#349 -23.5

#352 -inf

#355 -30.8

#357 -4.29

#358 -inf

#361 -2.1

#362 -2.8

#363 -18.6

#365 -inf

#366 -9.79

#367 -12.5

#370 -2.79

#372 -6.96

#336 -inf

#338 -3.51

#339 -inf

#341 -inf

#346 -inf

#409 -4.28

#375 -6.95

#380 -17.5

#382 -14

#387 -2.1

#394 -3.14

#381 -2.82

#383 -13

#395 -inf

#388 -2.79

#389 -6.96

#390 -inf

#398 -11.1

#347 -9.57

#351 -inf

#356 -inf

#371 -3.51

#439 -4.28

#402 -2.1

#403 -inf

#404 -inf

#406 -2.1

#408 -inf

#416 -2.1

#418 -4.89

#412 -7.98

#413 -3.14

#415 -15.2

#410 -6.27

#411 -2.09

#414 -inf

#421 -2.79

#426 -16.9

#376 -11.2

#377 -3.51

#378 -3.51

#420 -11.1

#422 -inf

#425 -2.1

#436 -27.6

#440 -19

#419 -22.3

#423 -3.34

#433 -19

#429 -inf

#430 -9.03

#432 -8.33

#454 -7.07

#424 -3.14

#427 -2.11

#428 -14.7

#431 -21.9

#435 -inf

#438 -12

#450 -3.49

#451 -19

#385 -12.5

#399 -20.2

#384 -2.12

#386 -inf

#441 -inf

#443 -2.1

#446 -64.2

#447 -3.36

#453 -19.4

#434 -2.8

#437 -inf

#442 -3.47

#445 -inf

#448 -2.11

#391 -inf

#392 -8.25

#393 -15.4

#396 -2.12

#458 -18

#460 -13.1

#461 -inf

#463 -11.8

#467 -19.4

#468 -12.5

#474 -inf

#457 -3.36

#444 -12.5

#449 -34.3

#452 -61.3

#455 -2.11

#456 -2.92

#400 -4.3

#401 -6.3

#405 -11.1

#407 -17.1

#417 -6.3

#464 -6.45

#459 -2.11

#462 -2.11

#472 -2.92

#469 -11.4

#470 -2.11

#471 -2.11

#465 -2.11

#466 -2.11

#473 -2.11

#478 -2.09

#482 -23.6

#479 -2.11

#484 -2.11

#476 -inf

#483 -2.11

#475 -2.11

#477 -2.11

#480 -inf

#481 -inf

#486 -2.09

#487 -61

#490 -3.47

#491 -64.6

#494 -14.5

#495 -3.47

#485 -2.11

#492 -4.87

#493 -2.11

#488 -2.11

#489 -2.8

#496 -21

#497 -26.8

#500 -2.09

#501 -11.1

#503 -23.8

#505 -19

#508 -2.09

#499 -2.11

#502 -2.11

#498 -2.11

#510 -2.09

#511 #513 #514 -inf -11.1 -2.09

#515 -2.09

#517 -2.09

#522 -13.4

#523 -2.1

#524 -2.1

#504 -2.11

#507 -61

#506 -2.11

#518 -20.3

#519 -27.7

#520 -19

#521 -2.09

#528 -22.2

#529 -6.1

#530 -inf

#536 -23.6

#538 -2.09

#547 -11.1

#552 -2.09

#539 -3.69

#541 -17.9

#548 -21.5

#551 -2.09

#540 -inf

#544 -2.09

#550 -inf

#542 -2.1

#525 -2.1

#526 -11.4

#527 -2.1

#531 -11.8

#512 -2.11

#509 -2.83

#535 -11.8

#537 -inf

#543 -12.8

#546 -2.09

#549 -inf

#553 -2.11

#554 -2.09

#560 -2.09

#568 -22.7

#571 -22.7

#589 -inf

#566 -2.09

#575 -20.6

#561 -11.2

#590 -11.1

#582 -15.9

#533 -2.09

#545 -14.9

#532 -inf

#534 -2.12

#555 -11.2

#516 -inf

#557 -2.2

#558 -2.09

#563 -2.09

#587 -3.48

#559 -inf

#562 -2.09

#572 -11.1

#576 -23.4

#591 -2.09

#569 -22.7

#581 -2.09

#577 -2.09

#578 -68.8

#556 -11.8

#588 -11.8

#564 -inf

#565 -2.78

#573 -inf

#579 -2.1

#593 -12.7

#594 -12.2

#567 -inf

#570 -2.09

#574 -20.7

#580 -22

#598 -17.2

#599 -inf

#600 -24.5

#602 -14.9

#603 -13.2

#604 -inf

#605 -63

#606 -2.09

#607 -inf

#608 -23.6

#595 -2.09

#596 -2.09

#610 -24.2

#614 -2.09

#601 -2.1

#583 -inf

#584 -61.7

#585 -24.6

#586 -12.8

#592 -15.6

#597 -17.7

#609 -2.09

#611 -2.09

#612 -2.09

#613 -17.1

#615 -2.09

#617 -2.07

#616 -2.09

#619 -2.09

#618 -inf

#620 -2.09

#626 -12.4

#623 -2.09

#624 -2.09

#621 -12

#627 -2.24

#622 -2.09

#625 -11.8

#628 -inf

#630 -62.4

#638 -2.08

#643 -2.08

#642 -2.09

#639 -2.09

#629 -2.78

#631 -2.09

#633 -inf

#637 -17.1

#634 -12.9

#636 -12.5

#632 -11.8

#635 -2.09

#644 -2.09

#647 -28.2

#650 -inf

#662 -11.1

#653 -2.08

#658 -11.1

#660 -2.08

#640 -2.09

#641 -2.09

#645 -2.09

#646 -2.09

#654 -2.09

#665 -17.6

#666 -2.08

#667 -80.3

#670 -2.08

#675 -2.08

#679 -11.2

#648 -2.09

#651 -11.4

#649 -2.09

#652 -14.9

#655 -11.1

#668 -2.09

#656 -11.2

#669 -2.09

#663 -61

#671 -11.9

#676 -2.08

#681 -11.3

#687 -0.884

#684 -2.08

#689 -2.76

#657 -2.09

#659 -27

#664 -2.09

#661 -2.09

#680 -2.09

#682 -2.09

#685 -12.5

#690 -2.08

#696 -0.884

#702 #705 #712 #697 #703 #711

-0.884 -11.3

-18

-11.2

-inf

-2.1

#672 -2.09

#678 -2.09

#673 -2.08

#677 -2.09

#674 -2.09

#695 -2.09

#693 -11.4

#698 -2.1

#704 -inf

#714 -0.884

#716 #723 -11.8 -0.884

#713 #715 -0.884 -14.6

#722 -11.2

#683 -2.09

#692 -18.4

#686 -2.08

#694 -2.08

#688 -2.09

#691 -2.09

#709 -2.09

#727 -18

#730 -0.888

#733 -11.3

#738 -1.56

#742 #744 -11.3 -0.884

#748 -0.884

#728 -inf

#729 -inf

#734 -0.884

#747 -0.874

#701 -2.09

#699 -2.08

#707 -2.08

#706 -2.08

#708 -2.08

#700 -2.09

#710 -2.09

#739 -11.4

#743 -8.51

#745 #759 -2.14 -0.888

#753 -1.56

#755 -1.56

#757 -12.5

#778 #780 #782 -11.1 -0.884 -11.3

#760 -0.884

#761 -0.884

#749 -0.884

#754 -inf

#756 -0.884

#758 -19

#764 -0.868

#765 #772 -0.874 -inf

#775 -inf

#719 -2.09

#718 -12.5

#737 -11.2

#720 -2.08

#726 -13.2

#721 -2.08

#724 -2.08

#725 -11.1

#736 -2.08

#717 -2.78

#785 #795 -0.888 -12

#766 -inf

#773 -11.2

#769 -1.56

#774 -inf

#815 -inf

#816 #818 -0.884 -0.884

#776 -11.1

#781 -0.884

#777 -11.3

#779 -1.4

#763 #770 #767 -65.3 -0.884 -11.8

#768 -inf

#783 #786 #788 -11.7 -0.868 -11.3

#796 -19.6

#784 -11.3

#787 -inf

#789 -0.874

#732 -2.09

#731 -2.08

#735 -2.08

#741 -12.5

#740 -14.1

#752 -2.08

#810 -inf

#811 -0.888

#792 -1.56

#859 -66.3

#835 -inf

#844 -inf

#797 #798 -0.884 -0.884

#793 -11.8

#813 -12.7

#791 -11.8

#794 -2.13

#817 -inf

#799 -19

#801 -0.868

#803 -11.3

#805 -18.8

#812 -inf

#800 -0.874

#802 -0.874

#804 -0.874

#809 -0.874

#746 -2.09

#751 -12.5

#750 -2.08

#762 -2.08

#839 -0.888

#807 -1.56

#806 -2.08

#808 -inf

#814 #820 #823 -11.1 -0.884 -0.884

#819 -inf

#821 -inf

#822 -11.8

#824 -inf

#870 -11.3

#830 -11.1

#833 -0.88

#843 -19

#825 -11.5

#826 -63.7

#828 -2.08

#829 #831 #832 -11.3 -0.874 -11.1

#842 -0.874

#834 #838 -0.874 -12.5

#841 -21.9

#771 -2.08

#865 -6.7

#827 -1.56

#837 #851 #836 #850 -11.3 -0.884 -0.884 -11.3

#846 -12

#848 -0.87

#852 -12.8

#845 #847 -0.874 -inf

#849 #855 #862 #866 -2.09 -0.874 -0.874 -inf

#856 #861 #867 -11.3 -0.874 -0.874

#790 -2.08

#840 -1.56

#860 #853 -0.884 -0.884

#854 -0.87

#858 -0.87

#864 -0.87

#868 -11.1

#857 #863 #873 -11.1 -0.874 -2.09

#884 #890 #883 #888 -17.9 -0.874 -0.874 -34.3

#878 -15.9

#887 -18.8

#877 #886 -12.1 -0.874

#871 -1.56

#872 #869 -0.884 -0.884

#876 -0.87

#882 -0.87

#874 -1.57

#881 -0.87

#875 -65.3

#880 -0.87

#879 -0.874

#912 #906 -0.874 -11.3

#908 -inf

#902 -12.8

#904 -17.7

#889 #885 -0.884 -0.884

#891 -0.87

#894 -0.87

#898 -2.11

#899 -0.87

#892 -inf

#893 -0.87

#901 -11.3

#895 #896 -13.2 -0.868

#900 -0.87

#903 -0.874

#929 -0.874

#909 #897 #905 -0.884 -11.3 -0.871

#907 -0.87

#916 -0.87

#919 -0.87

#918 -0.87

#923 -17.7

#911 #913 #928 -11.2 -0.877 -0.87

#915 -11.3

#917 -inf

#925 -2.1

#946 #948 #910 -11.3 -0.868 -9.01

#914 #922 #966 -11.3 -0.874 -14.7

#921 #926 -13.2 -0.871

#920 -0.87

#924 -0.87

#933 -0.87

#940 -0.87

#934 -0.87

#939 -0.87

#930 -19

#938 #945 #931 -0.87 -0.877 -0.87

#936 -11.3

#942 -0.87

#959 -12

#961 -0.867

#965 -11.8

#967 -11.1

#941 -inf

#935 #947 #943 -11.3 -0.871 -0.87

#944 -0.87

#932 -0.87

#937 -inf

#951 -11.3

#952 -0.87

#949 -0.87

#953 -11.6

#960 -0.87

#955 -19

#963 -0.87

#950 -0.87

#962 -0.87

#979 #981 -0.867 -11.1

#983 -12.5

#984 -0.867

#964 #957 -0.871 -0.87

#958 -0.87

#956 -0.87

#972 -0.87

#954 -11.3

#971 -0.87

#980 -0.87

#982 -0.87

#969 -0.87

#976 -11.1

#968 #985 #987 #993 #994 -11.3 -0.867 -11.3 -0.867 -inf

#999 #1006 #1011 -11.3 -0.867 -1.75

#977 #974 -0.871 -35.6

#970 -0.87

#973 -0.87

#988 -17

#989 -0.87

#995 -0.87

#996 -0.87

#998 #1001 -0.87 -12.8

#986 -11.1

#992 #1000 #1005 #1013 #1002 #1004 #1010 -2.69 -0.867 -2.08 -12.1 -11.9 -0.867 -0.867

#997 -0.871

#991 -0.87

#990 -0.87

#1007 #1003 #1012 -0.87 -0.867 -19

1014 -0.851

#1015 #1016 -18.7 -11.3

#1009 #1008 -0.869 -0.87

Supplementary Fig. S19 | Breakthrough plot and solution tree for the numerical integration task. Top Figure Breakthrough plot for the Integral tree search, showing the evolution of the maximum score as a function of the number of nodes. The green dots label places where the score abruptly increases due to an improvement in the code, and the label describes the change in the code that resulted in the score increase. Bottom Figure Structure of the tree for this same search. The color range consists of orange (lower scores) to green (higher scores) with the highest score denoted by a diamond node.

55

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Fig. S20 | Scores of the best numerical integration routine applied to the held-out set of 19 integrals. Zero is a perfect score. The generated function solved 17 of 19 integrals to within 3 percent. The standard function, scipy.integrate.quad() failed in all these cases.
56

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
B. Supplementary Tables

Supplementary Table S1 | Computational budget and execution costs per search node across evaluated benchmarks. We report the average number of request and response tokens processed by the language model per node, alongside the average sandbox execution duration and hardware requirements. The overall computational cost scales linearly with the total number of nodes explored during the search.

Task

Request Tokens Response Tokens Duration (min) Sandbox Type

Batch Integration Covid Forecasting GIFT-Eval Integrals Geospatial ZAPBench

16,171 9,607
15,828 224,415a
7,186 16,809

4,183 3,392 9,308 6,074 3,172 8,036

8.0 1.2 53.3 1.5 16.4 192.2

GPUb CPU CPU CPU GPU GPU

a The request token count for the integrals is artificially inflated due to tokenization of images in the
prompt. b The GPUs used in this study are NVIDIA Tesla T4.

Supplementary Table S2 | Kaggle Playground Series (Season 3) Competitions included in the experiments.

Competition Name
Regression with a Tabular California Housing Dataset Binary Classification with a Tabular Stroke Prediction Dataset Binary Classification with a Tabular Employee Attrition Dataset Binary Classification with a Tabular Credit Card Fraud Dataset Tabular Classification with a Wine Quality Dataset Binary Classification with a Tabular Reservation Cancellation Dataset Tabular Regression with a Gemstone Price Dataset Regression with a Tabular Concrete Strength Dataset Binary Classification with a Tabular Pulsar Dataset Regression with a Tabular Media Campaign Cost Dataset Binary Classification with a Tabular Kidney Stone Prediction Dataset Regression with a Wild Blueberry Yield Dataset Regression with a Crab Age Dataset Binary Classification of Machine Failures Forecasting Mini-Course Sales Predict CO2 Emissions in Rwanda

Episode
s3e1 s3e2 s3e3 s3e4 s3e5 s3e7 s3e8 s3e9 s3e10 s3e11 s3e12 s3e14 s3e16 s3e17 s3e19 s3e20

57

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Table S3 | Prompt for Kaggle Playground competitions. The prompt is used for ERA on the Kaggle Playground Benchmark. This example is for Season 3 Episode 17.
Prompt for Kaggle Playground Competitions
Please write the python code to work on a Kaggle competition. Use any model you like. Kaggle competition name: Binary Classification of Machine Failures The competition is evaluated as follows: Submissions are evaluated on area under the ROC curve between the predicted probability and the observed target.
Submission File For each `id` in the test set, you must predict the probability of a `Machine failure`. The file should contain a header and have the following format:
id,Machine failure 136429,0.5 136430,0.1 136431,0.9 etc.
Here are a few lines of each of the files:
file_name : sample_submission.csv
file_contents:
id,Machine failure 79996,0 100009,0 etc.
==== file_name : test.csv
file_contents: etc. ==== file_name : train.csv
file_contents: etc. ==== Please provide complete code that will generate the submission file in the format below:
```python YOUR CODE ```
58

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Table S4 | Expert advice for Kaggle Playground competitions. The prompt is used for the TS with Expert Advice on the Kaggle Playground Benchmark.
Expert advice prompt for Kaggle Playground competitions Here is high level advice: Instead of putting all your effort into a single model, experiment with combining two or more models. Start with simple averaging of predictions and then explore more advanced techniques like stacking. Try out several different types of models (e.g., gradient boosting machines, linear models, and even simpler models like logistic regression) to see how they perform. Look for opportunities to go beyond standard preprocessing. Investigate the data for potential leaks, and consider using optimization libraries to find the best way to combine your models' predictions. While feature engineering is a crucial skill, it's also important to recognize when it might not be the most important factor. Sometimes, the choice of model and ensembling strategy can have a bigger impact. Don't be afraid to try a more "brute-force" approach with powerful models that can handle raw data effectively.
Supplementary Table S5 | Boosted decision trees for Kaggle Playground competitions. The prompt is used for the TS with Boosted Decision Tree on the Kaggle Playground Benchmark.
Expert Advice Prompt for Kaggle Playground Competitions Given the code you are given please rewrite any library code (such as XGBoost, LightGBM, and CatBoost) by making internal algorithmic choices that produce performant training code and models that generalize well in many situations. Things you can try are alternative representations of data, using different step size algorithms, using the output of a strong learner as input to the next weak learner. If the code contains such libraries, please extract the raw code that is being used in the library and rewrite it to improve performance.
59

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Table S6 | Example code generated by ERA. We prompted ERA to generate a solution for single-cell batch integration. We refer to this solution as BBKNN (TS).

Example code generated by ERA.

from typing import Any from sklearn.decomposition import TruncatedSVD from sklearn.neighbors import NearestNeighbors from scipy.sparse import lil_matrix , csr_matrix import numpy as np import scanpy as sc import anndata as ad import heapq # For efficiently getting top K elements from merged lists

# Define parameters for the config.

# These values are chosen to balance computational cost and integration performance

# for datasets with up to ~300k cells and 2k genes.

config = {

'n_pca_components ': 100,

# Number of PCA components. Recommended: 50-200.

# Captures sufficient variance while reducing dimensionality.

'n_neighbors_per_batch ': 10, # Number of neighbors to find within each batch. Recommended: 5-15.

# This defines the local batch context for each cell.

'total_k_neighbors ': 50,

# Total number of nearest neighbors to retain for the final graph. Recommended: 15-100.

# This forms the global batch -integrated graph.

}

def eliminate_batch_effect_fn( adata: ad.AnnData , config: dict[str , Any]
) -> ad.AnnData: # Create a copy to ensure the original input adata remains unchanged. adata_integrated = adata.copy()
# --- Preprocessing: Normalize , log -transform , scale --# These are standard initial steps for scRNA -seq data. # Use adata.X which contains raw counts. sc.pp.normalize_total(adata_integrated , target_sum=1e4) sc . pp . log1p ( adata_integrated ) sc.pp.scale(adata_integrated , max_value =10) # Clip values to avoid extreme outliers
# --- Batch Correction: ComBat on the gene expression matrix --# This step applies a more robust linear model -based batch correction # directly on the gene expression data before dimensionality reduction. # ComBat modifies adata_integrated.X in place. sc.pp.combat(adata_integrated , key='batch ')
# --- Dimensionality Reduction: PCA on the ComBat -corrected data --# n_comps cannot exceed min(n_obs - 1, n_vars). Robustly handle small datasets. n_pca_components = config.get('n_pca_components ', 100) actual_n_pca_components = min(n_pca_components , adata_integrated.n_vars , adata_integrated.n_obs - 1)
# Handle edge cases for PCA and graph construction where data is too small. # If PCA cannot be run meaningfully , return a minimal AnnData object to avoid errors. if actual_n_pca_components <= 0 or adata_integrated.n_obs <= 1:
print(f"Warning: Too few observations ({adata_integrated.n_obs}) or dimensions ({adata_integrated.n_vars}) for PCA/ graph construction. Returning trivial embedding.") # Provide a placeholder embedding and empty graph structure. adata_integrated.obsm['X_emb '] = np.zeros((adata_integrated.n_obs , 1)) adata_integrated.obsp['connectivities '] = csr_matrix((adata_integrated.n_obs , adata_integrated.n_obs)) adata_integrated.obsp['distances '] = csr_matrix((adata_integrated.n_obs , adata_integrated.n_obs)) adata_integrated.uns['neighbors '] = {
'params ': { 'n_neighbors ': 0, 'method ': 'degenerate ', 'n_pcs ': 0, 'n_neighbors_per_batch ': 0, 'pca_batch_correction ': 'none ',
}, 'connectivities_key ': 'connectivities ', 'distances_key ': 'distances ', } return adata_integrated
sc.tl.pca(adata_integrated , n_comps=actual_n_pca_components , svd_solver='arpack ')
# Set the ComBat -corrected PCA embedding as the integrated output embedding. # This 'X_emb ' will be directly evaluated by metrics like ASW , LISI , PCR. adata_integrated.obsm['X_emb '] = adata_integrated.obsm['X_pca ']

# --- Custom Batch -Aware Nearest Neighbors Graph Construction --# This implements the expert advice: find neighbors independently within batches , then merge. # This part of the code remains largely the same , but now operates on the # ComBat -corrected PCA embedding (adata_integrated.obsm['X_emb ']). k_batch_neighbors = config.get('n_neighbors_per_batch ', 10) total_k_neighbors = config.get('total_k_neighbors ', 50)

# A list of dictionaries to store unique neighbors and their minimum distances for each cell. # Using dictionaries allows efficient updating if a cell is found as a neighbor from multiple batches. merged_neighbors_per_cell = [{} for _ in range(adata_integrated.n_obs)]

# Group cell indices by batch for efficient querying.

batches = adata_integrated.obs['batch '].values

unique_batches = np.unique(batches)

batch_to_indices = {b: np.where(batches == b)[0] for b in unique_batches}

60

# Pre -fit NearestNeighbors models for each batch 's data using the corrected PCA embedding. # This avoids refitting the model for every query. batch_nn_models = {} for b_id in unique_batches:
batch_cell_indices = batch_to_indices[b_id] # Ensure there are enough cells to fit a NearestNeighbors model (at least k_batch_neighbors + 1 for self -exclusion , or
just > 0 for min k=1)

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Example code generated by ERA (continued).

if k_fit_effective > 0: # Only fit if there are points available nn_model = NearestNeighbors(n_neighbors=k_fit_effective , metric='euclidean ', algorithm='auto ') nn_model.fit(adata_integrated.obsm['X_emb '][ batch_cell_indices]) batch_nn_models[b_id] = nn_model

# Iterate through all possible query batches and target batches to find neighbors. for query_batch_id in unique_batches:
query_global_indices = batch_to_indices[query_batch_id] if len(query_global_indices) == 0:
continue # Skip empty query batches

query_data = adata_integrated.obsm['X_emb '][query_global_indices]

for target_batch_id in unique_batches: if target_batch_id not in batch_nn_models: continue # Skip target batches that were too small to fit an NN model

nn_model = batch_nn_models[target_batch_id] target_global_indices = batch_to_indices[target_batch_id]

# Ensure n_neighbors does not exceed the number of points in the target batch. k_for_query = min(k_batch_neighbors , len(target_global_indices) -1) # -1 to avoid finding self as neighbor if batch is query batch if k_for_query <= 0: # No valid neighbors can be found in this target batch
continue

# Query neighbors for all cells in the current query batch against the target batch 's data. distances , indices_in_target_batch = nn_model.kneighbors(query_data , n_neighbors=k_for_query , return_distance= True)

for i_query_local in range(len(query_global_indices)): current_cell_global_idx = query_global_indices[i_query_local]

dists_for_cell = distances[i_query_local] global_neighbors_for_cell = target_global_indices[indices_in_target_batch[i_query_local]]

for k_idx in range(len(global_neighbors_for_cell)): neighbor_global_idx = global_neighbors_for_cell[k_idx] dist = dists_for_cell[k_idx]

# Exclude self -loops: a cell should not be its own neighbor in graph construction. if neighbor_global_idx == current_cell_global_idx:
continue

# Store neighbor and its distance. If already present , keep the minimum distance (closest connection). if (neighbor_global_idx not in merged_neighbors_per_cell[current_cell_global_idx] or
dist < merged_neighbors_per_cell[current_cell_global_idx][neighbor_global_idx]): merged_neighbors_per_cell[current_cell_global_idx][neighbor_global_idx] = dist

# Convert collected neighbors and distances into sparse matrices. rows = [] cols = [] data_distances = []

for i in range(adata_integrated.n_obs): # Retrieve all candidate neighbors for cell 'i', sort by distance , and take the top 'total_k_neighbors '. current_cell_candidates = list(merged_neighbors_per_cell[i].items())

if not current_cell_candidates: # If a cell has no valid neighbors after all filtering continue

# Use heapq for efficient selection of the smallest distances. selected_neighbors = heapq.nsmallest(total_k_neighbors , current_cell_candidates , key=lambda item: item[1])

for neighbor_idx , dist in selected_neighbors: rows.append(i) cols.append(neighbor_idx) data_distances.append(dist)

# Create distance matrix. Handle case with no neighbors found at all for the entire dataset. if not rows:
distances_matrix = csr_matrix((adata_integrated.n_obs , adata_integrated.n_obs)) else:
distances_matrix = csr_matrix((data_distances , (rows , cols)), shape=(adata_integrated.n_obs , adata_integrated.n_obs) )

# Symmetrize the distance matrix: if A is a neighbor of B, then B is also a neighbor of A, # with the distance being the maximum of the two observed distances (ensures undirected graph). distances_matrix = distances_matrix.maximum(distances_matrix.T) distances_matrix.eliminate_zeros() # Remove any explicit zeros created by max operation

# Create connectivities matrix (binary representation of connections). connectivities_matrix = distances_matrix.copy() connectivities_matrix.data[:] = 1.0 # All non -zero entries become 1.0 (connected). connectivities_matrix . eliminate_zeros () connectivities_matrix = connectivities_matrix.astype(float)

# Store the custom graph in adata.obsp. These keys are used by scib metrics. adata_integrated.obsp['connectivities '] = connectivities_matrix adata_integrated.obsp['distances '] = distances_matrix

# Store parameters in adata.uns['neighbors '] for completeness and scanpy/scib compatibility.

adata_integrated.uns['neighbors '] = {

'params ': {

'n_neighbors ': total_k_neighbors ,

'method ': 'custom_batch_aware_combat_pca ', # Reflects the integration strategy

'metric ': 'euclidean ',

61

'n_pcs ': actual_n_pca_components ,

'n_neighbors_per_batch ': k_batch_neighbors ,

'pca_batch_correction ': 'combat ', # Indicates ComBat was applied before PCA

},

'connectivities_key ': 'connectivities ',

'distances_key ': 'distances ',

}

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Table S7 | Prompt for recombination of baseline method ideas. The prompt instructs Gemini to identify the main differences in the principles of top-performing solutions, obtained from tree search runs seeded with baseline methods. This generated summary then serves as part of an explicit instruction for tree search to create hybrid strategies.
Prompt for summarizing differences between two baseline methods. Compare these two code solutions to the same problem of integrating single-cell batch effects. Explain the main principles that differ between the codes: CODE 1: [CODE FROM BASELINE 1] CODE 2: [CODE FROM BASELINE 2]
62

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Supplementary Table S8 | Configuration of COVID-19 forecasting data splits.

Strategy Google Retro. 1 Google Retro. 2 Google Retro. 3 Google Retro. 4 Google Retro. 5 Google Retro. 6 Google Retro. 7 Google Retro. 8 Google Retro. 9 Google Retro. 10 Google Retro. 11 Google Retro. 12 Google Retro. 13 Google Retro. 14 All other TS

Validation Reference Dates

Test Reference Dates Horizons

2024-10-05, 2024-10-12, 2024- 2024-11-16, 2024-11- 1Ł4 weeks 10-19, 2024-10-26, 2024-11-02, 23, 2024-11-30 2024-11-09

2024-10-19, 2024-10-26, 2024- 2024-11-30, 2024-12- 1Ł4 weeks 11-02, 2024-11-09, 2024-11-16, 07, 2024-12-14 2024-11-23

2024-11-02, 2024-11-09, 2024- 2024-12-14, 2024-12- 1Ł4 weeks 11-16, 2024-11-23, 2024-11-30, 21, 2024-12-28 2024-12-07

2024-11-16, 2024-11-23, 2024- 2024-12-28, 2025-01- 1Ł4 weeks 11-30, 2024-12-07, 2024-12-14, 04, 2025-01-11 2024-12-21

2024-11-30, 2024-12-07, 2024- 2025-01-11, 2025-01- 1Ł4 weeks 12-14, 2024-12-21, 2024-12-28, 18, 2025-01-25 2025-01-04

2024-12-14, 2024-12-21, 2024- 2025-01-25, 2025-02- 1Ł4 weeks 12-28, 2025-01-04, 2025-01-11, 01, 2025-02-08 2025-01-18

2024-12-28, 2025-01-04, 2025- 2025-02-08, 2025-02- 1Ł4 weeks 01-11, 2025-01-18, 2025-01-25, 15, 2025-02-22 2025-02-01

2025-01-11, 2025-01-18, 2025- 2025-02-22, 2025-03- 1Ł4 weeks 01-25, 2025-02-01, 2025-02-08, 01, 2025-03-08 2025-02-15

2025-01-25, 2025-02-01, 2025- 2025-03-08, 2025-03- 1Ł4 weeks 02-08, 2025-02-15, 2025-02-22, 15, 2025-03-22 2025-03-01

2025-02-08, 2025-02-15, 2025- 2025-03-22, 2025-03- 1Ł4 weeks 02-22, 2025-03-01, 2025-03-08, 29, 2025-04-05 2025-03-15

2025-02-22, 2025-03-01, 2025- 2025-04-05, 2025-04- 1Ł4 weeks 03-08, 2025-03-15, 2025-03-22, 12, 2025-04-19 2025-03-29

2025-03-08, 2025-03-15, 2025- 2025-04-19, 2025-04- 1Ł4 weeks 03-22, 2025-03-29, 2025-04-05, 26, 2025-05-03 2025-04-12

2025-03-22, 2025-03-29, 2025- 2025-05-03, 2025-05- 1Ł4 weeks 04-05, 2025-04-12, 2025-04-19, 10, 2025-05-17 2025-04-26

2025-04-05, 2025-04-12, 2025- 2025-05-17, 2025-05- 1Ł4 weeks 04-19, 2025-04-26, 2025-05-03, 24, 2025-05-31 2025-05-10

2025-02-22, 2025-03-01, 2025- 2025-04-05, 2025-04- 1Ł4 weeks 03-08, 2025-03-15, 2025-03-22, 12, 2025-04-19 2025-03-29

Locations 52 US 52 US 52 US 52 US 52 US 52 US 52 US 52 US 52 US 52 US 52 US 52 US 52 US 52 US 52 US

Metric WIS WIS WIS WIS WIS WIS WIS WIS WIS WIS WIS WIS WIS WIS WIS

63

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Table S9 | Method descriptions used for replicating COVID-19 models submitted to the CDC's CovidHub.
CEPH-Rtrend_covid "Use a renewal equation method based on Bayesian estimation of Rt from hospitalization data. Model forecasts should be obtained by using a renewal equation based on the estimated net reproduction number Rt. Apply a lowpass filter to the time series of weekly hospitalizations, then interpolate it to daily resolution. Then use MCMC Metropolis-Hastings sampling to estimate the posterior distribution of Rt based on the filtered data, considering an informed prior on Rt based on COVID-19 literature. The estimated Rt in the last weeks of available data is used to forecast Rt in the upcoming weeks, with a drift term proportional to the current incidence. Finally, use the renewal equation with the posterior distribution and trend of the estimated Rt in the most recent weeks of hospitalization data."
CMU-TimeSeries "Use an ensemble of AR-based time-series models, involving a basic quantile autoregression fit using lagged values of covid-related hospitalization counts (normalized by population). The data should be smoothed in time. Fit the model jointly across all jurisdictions using the most recently available 21 days of training data. Learn each of the 23 quantiles using a separate quantile regression with nonnegativity and quantile sorting constraints applied post hoc."
CMU-climate_baseline "Use an ensemble of historically formed quantiles. Using data from 2022 onwards, this climatological model should use samples from the 7 weeks centered around the target week and reference week to form the quantiles for the target week, as one might use climate information to form a meteorological forecast. To get more variation at some potential issue of generalization, one can form quantiles after aggregating across geographic values as well as years (after converting to a rate based case count). This model should use a simple average of the geo-specific quantiles and the geo-aggregated quantiles."
JHU_CSSE-CSSE_Ensemble "Use a Multi-Pathogen Optimized Geo-Hierarchical Ensemble Framework (MPOG-Ensemble). Forecast state-level COVID-19 hospitalizations using a combination of time series forecasting methods, organized across three hierarchical levels. At the individual state level, forecasts are generated using Holt-Winters Exponential Smoothing. For regional predictions, which group states based on past 2 years covid-19 activity trends identified through the Louvain method, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) models are employed. Additionally, a LSTM model that covers all states is implemented. These three-tiered model outputs are integrated, selecting weights based on their recent performance in terms of Mean Absolute Error (MAE) to produce the final prediction."
64

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
OHT_JHU-nbxd "Use a neural network that encodes the data inputs using a TCN (Bai et al. 2018) and decodes the result into a forecast using N-BEATS (Oreshkin et al. 2000). This is a residual block type architecture that generates point forecasts from univariate time series data. The network accepts a fixed lookback window of time points as input, and has a set number of output nodes corresponding to the length of the forecast horizon. Extend the network with additional residual blocks that output error variance forecasts (evaluated using a likelihood loss function) which allows generating quantile forecasts, assuming a parametric (gamma) error distribution. Additional predictor variables are incorporated using a temporal convolutional network (TCN; Bai et al. 2018). The TCN accepts one input channel for each predictor time series (or static variable), including past values of the target variable, and outputs a single channel with the same length as the lookback window. The TCN output channel is used as the input to the extended N-BEATS network. Each value in the TCN output sequence is a non-linear combination of the predictor variables at that point and all previous points in the lookback window, which preserves the temporal structure of the input. Forecast is the median of an ensemble of such models with varying lookback window sizes and random initializations."
UM-DeepOutbreak "Use a deep neural network model with conformal predictions. The neural network architecture is a sequence-to-sequence model based on recurrent units and self-attention modules. It is trained in a multi-task setting where each region is considered a task. The uncertainty quantification is conducted post hoc with conformal predictions that follows adaptive conformal inference to adapt to distribution shifts. Spatial correlation is not considered."
UMass-ar6_pooled "Use an autoregressive model with shared coefficients across locations: AR(6) model after fourth root data transform. AR coefficients are shared across all locations. A separate variance parameter is estimated for each location."
UMass-gbqr "Use gradient boosting quantile regression. Do gradient boosting using features summarizing signal activity, properties of the location, information about the timing of forecast creation, and the forecast horizon."
65

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Table S10 | Prompt for replicating COVID-19 models submitted to CovidHub by injecting method descriptions as {method} into existing tree search prompt.
Prompt for replicating models submitted to CovidHub. Please write the python code to work on a competition. {method} I've already loaded the train / test files and split out the x and y parts. Please provide a new definition for the function below, complete with imports, that will generalize well. However, do not do any cross-validation in here. Your function should expect options to be passed in via the config argument. I'll use cross-validation myself to select which of the options in the config_list generalizes best. {method} from typing import Any # Don't forget this! import pandas as pd def fit_and_predict_fn(
train_x: pd.DataFrame, train_y: pd.Series, test_x: pd.DataFrame, config: dict[str, Any]) -> pd.Series: """Make predictions for test_x by modeling train_x to train_y. Do not do any cross-validation in here. """ mean_y = np.mean(train_y) return pd.Series([mean_y] * len(test_x), index=test_x.index) # These will get scored by code that I supply. You'll get back a summary # of the performance of each of them. config_list = [{}]
And format it like this: # YOUR CODE # YOUR config_list
66

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Supplementary Table S11 | Expert manual inspection of adherence of ERA implementation to COVID-19 modeling methods.

Method
CEPH-Rtrend_covid x CMU-TimeSeries CEPH-Rtrend_covid x CMU-climate_ baseline CEPH-Rtrend_covid x JHU_CSSECSSE_Ensemble CEPH-Rtrend_covid x OHT_JHU-nbxd CEPH-Rtrend_covid and UM-DeepOutbreak CEPH-Rtrend_covid x UMass-ar6_pooled CEPH-Rtrend_covid x UMass-gbqr CMU-TimeSeries x CMUclimate_baseline CMU-TimeSeries x JHU_CSSECSSE_Ensemble CMU-TimeSeries x OHT_JHU-nbxd CMU-TimeSeries x UM-DeepOutbreak CMU-TimeSeries x UMass-ar6_pooled CMU-TimeSeries x UMass-gbqr CMUclimate_baseline x JHU_CSSECSSE_Ensemble CMUclimate_baseline x OHT_JHU-nbxd CMUclimate_baseline x UM-DeepOutbreak CMUclimate_baseline x UMass-ar6_pooled

Judgment Follow

Notes

Follow

Follow

Follow Follow
Follow + Innovate Follow Follow

Translates  into engineered features (lagged differences, ratios). Feeds mechanistic-inspired features into GRU-based encoder, predicts quantiles via pinball loss.
Simulates from normal distribution in transformed space then inverse transforms to derive quantiles. Implements mechanistic model components as input features to ML model. AR model with climatological features as predictors.

Follow
Follow Follow Follow Follow Follow

Hierarchical ensemble of QuantReg AR models with performance-based weighting.
Ensemble of bagged QuantReg AR models.
LightGBM quantile regression models with iterative forecasting + conformal-like calibration. Ensemble of AR QuantReg models on fourth-root transformed data. LightGBM quantile models on population-normalized data with (un)smoothed lags + direct multi-horizon prediction. Hierarchical ensemble of climatological models.

Follow Follow Follow

Feeds climatological quantiles into LightGBM to learn directly from seasonal baseline.
LightGBM to predict central trend + climatological model for empirical quantile spreads.
Seasonally-aware method for estimating uncertainty based on empirical quantiles of AR residuals.
Continued on next page

67

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Supplementary Table S11 Ł continued from previous page

Method

Judgment Notes

CMU-

Follow

climate_baseline x

UMass-gbqr

JHU_CSSE-

Partially

CSSE_Ensemble x

Follow

OHT_JHU-nbxd

JHU_CSSE-

Follow +

CSSE_Ensemble x

Innovate

UM-DeepOutbreak

JHU_CSSE-

Follow

CSSE_Ensemble x

UMass-ar6_pooled

JHU_CSSE-

Follow

CSSE_Ensemble x

UMass-gbqr

OHT_JHU-nbxd x

Follow

UM-DeepOutbreak

OHT_JHU-nbxd x

Follow

UMass-ar6_pooled

OHT_JHU-nbxd x

Follow

UMass-gbqr

UM-DeepOutbreak x

Follow

UMass-ar6_pooled

UM-DeepOutbreak x

Follow

UMass-gbqr

UMass-ar6_pooled x

Follow

UMass-gbqr

DEEP-RESEARCH-

Follow

CSTGT

DEEP-RESEARCH-

Follow

MetaEnsembler

DEEP-RESEARCH-

Follow

FairnessAwareOptimization

DEEP-RESEARCH-

Follow

RegimeSwitchingDetection

CO-SCIENTIST-

Does not

STGNN-AgACI

Follow

CO-SCIENTIST-MAPS Partially

Follow

DEEP-RESEARCH-

Follow

GenomiWastewater

Fusion

DEEP-RESEARCH-

Follow +

AdversarialRecalibration Innovate

DEEP-RESEARCH-

Follow

BehavioralSensing

Feeds climatological statistics as features into LightGBM.
Hierarchical structure (state, regional, national models) + adaptive MAE-weighting. Secondary model to predict error magnitudes & find quantiles of normalized residuals.
Combines predictions from `adaptive' model trained on recent data & `stable' model trained on longer history.
Feature engineering + ensembling + variance-stabilizing transformation _ recursive forecasting. Uses LightGBM predicts parameters of Gamma distribution.
LightGBM quantile regression on fourth-root transformed target. Simplified static graph + synthetically generated policy feature. Meta-model to predict WIS. Iterative re-weighting approximates composite fairness loss.
AR quantile regression model using LightGBM. Omits AgACI stage, replaces with simpler post-processing. 3-stage ensemble: substitutes core models (GNN, TCN, GPR, MLP) with feature-engineered LightGBM proxies. Uses mock API calls.
Implements a post-hoc GAN structure. Composite loss function combining adversarial + pinball loss. Simulates external data.

Continued on next page

68

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Supplementary Table S11 Ł continued from previous page

Method

Judgment Notes

DEEP-RESEARCHHierarchicalBayesian NODE CO-SCIENTIST-HGPC
DEEP-RESEARCHPIDM

Follow
Partially Follow Follow

CO-SCIENTIST-HQE

Partially Follow

DEEP-RESEARCH-

Follow +

CounterfactualSimulation Innovate

rep-OHT_JHU-nbxd

Follow

rep-CMU-TimeSeries

Follow

rep-UMassar6_pooled
rep-UMDeepOutbreak

Follow Follow

rep-UMass-gbqr

Follow

rep-JHU_CSSECSSE_Ensemble

Follow + Innovate

Three-level model: Negative Binomial observation layer, Neural ODE for jurisdiction-level dynamics, global hyperpriors for partial pooling. LightGBM quantile regression, uses feature engineering as proxy for complex stages. Implements conditional Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) with U-Net backbone, with loss function a weighted composite of standard diffusion loss and a physicsbased regularization term derived from an SEIR-H model's outputs. Probabilistic forecasts generated by sampling from the learned reverse process. Trains multiple base models, feeds their predictions into a meta-learner, then applies a conformal prediction step to adjust final quantiles. Uses multiple LightGBM models instead of suggested Prophet/TBATS for diversity, manually implements conformal prediction instead of using MAPIE. Follows Monte Carlo structure: defines uncertain drivers with distributions, simulates N trajectories by applying sampled shocks to base median forecast, calculates empirical quantiles. Introduces Poisson noise on top of scenariodriven forecasts. Implements TCN encoder and N-BEATS decoder architecture, including extension of parallel residual blocks to forecast mean and variance for Gamma distribution. The final forecast is generated as a median of an ensemble with varying lookback windows and initializations. Implements a quantile autoregression model fit jointly across jurisdictions on smoothed, population-normalized data. Uses OLS on lagged, fourth-root transformed data to create a shared-coefficient AR model, then calculates separate variance parameters for each location based on residuals. Implements sequence-to-sequence model using a GRU and self-attention, with location embeddings. Uncertainty quantified post hoc using split conformal prediction on a recent time window. Uses LightGBM with engineered features (lags for signal activity, location and population for location properties, date components for timing, and the horizon itself). Implements three-tiered hierarchical ensemble, using HoltWinters, regional LSTMs with Louvain grouping, and a national LSTM, combined with MAE-based weighting. Uses scaled residuals to create prediction intervals that adapt to the magnitude of the forecast to generate quantile predictions.

Continued on next page

69

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Supplementary Table S11 Ł continued from previous page

Method

Judgment Notes

rep-CMUclimate_baseline
rep-CEPHRtrend_covid
retro_1

Follow + Innovate Follow
Follow

Averages geo-specific and geo-aggregated quantiles within a centered weekly window. Introduces a configurable 'smoothing_factor', which regularizes final predictions by pulling them towards zero. Lowpass filtering, daily interpolation, MCMC for Bayesian Rt estimation, and a renewal equation forecast. The Rt forecast correctly incorporates a sophisticated drift term that is modulated by the current incidence level.

70

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Supplementary Table S12 | Full GIFT-Eval leaderboard (05/18/2025 snapshot).

Model
Per-dataset TTM-R2-Finetuned timesfm_2_0_500m TabPFN-TS chronos_bolt_base Unified chronos_bolt_small PatchTST TEMPO_ensemble VisionTS Chronos_large Moirai_large Chronos_base Chronos_small Moirai_base TFT N-BEATS Moirai_small TTM-R2-Zeroshot DLinear Auto_Arima TimesFM TTM-R1-Zeroshot Auto_Theta TIDE Seasonal_Naive Timer Auto_ETS Lag-Llama DeepAR Naive Crossformer

MASE
0.671 0.679 0.680 0.692 0.725 0.734 0.738 0.762 0.773 0.775 0.781 0.785 0.786 0.800 0.809 0.822 0.842 0.849 0.915 0.952 0.964 0.967 0.969 0.978 0.980 1.000 1.019 1.088 1.102 1.206 1.260 2.310

Type
ERA fine-tuned pretrained pretrained pretrained ERA pretrained deep-learning fine-tuned pretrained pretrained pretrained pretrained pretrained pretrained deep-learning deep-learning pretrained pretrained deep-learning statistical pretrained pretrained statistical deep-learning statistical pretrained statistical pretrained deep-learning statistical deep-learning

71

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Table S13 | Example configurations from the final unified solution for the GIFT-Eval task. Each dictionary defines a complete forecasting strategy discovered by the tree search, combining different components of the Iterative Decomposition Model. The validation process selects the best configuration for each dataset.
Unified Solution Example Configurations
config_list = [ { 'name': 'seasonal_naive_baseline', 'description': 'Robust baseline...', 'components': [{'type': 'base', 'method': 'seasonal_naive_adaptive'}], 'transform_log': False, 'non_negative': False, 'version': 4, }, { 'name': 'additive_damped_linear_LogTransform', 'description': 'General-purpose additive model...', 'components': [ {'type': 'base', 'method': 'median_all'}, {'type': 'trend', 'method': 'polynomial', 'degree': 1, 'damping_factor': 0.90}, {'type': 'seasonal', 'method': 'average', 'window_multiplier': 5.0}, {'type': 'residual', 'method': 'median', 'window_size': 18, 'decay_factor': 0.90}, ], 'transform_log': True, 'non_negative': True, 'version': 4, }, { 'name': 'date_features_seasonal', 'description': 'Robust additive model with key cyclical and datetime features...', 'components': [ {'type': 'base', 'method': 'median_all'}, {'type': 'datetime', 'features': [ ['dayofweek', 'hour'], 'month', 'is_month_start', 'weekofyear', 'is_weekend', 'is_quarter_start', {'name': '_is_holiday_flag', 'country_codes': ['US', 'DE', 'CN', 'GB', 'CA', 'AU']} ]}, {'type': 'seasonal', 'method': 'average', 'window_multiplier': 4.0}, {'type': 'residual', 'method': 'median', 'window_size': 14, 'decay_factor': 0.92}, ], 'transform_log': False, 'non_negative': False, 'version': 4, }, % ... other configurations can be added here ...
]
72

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software

Supplementary Table S14 | Comparison of model performance on the DLRSD benchmark. The table shows the publication year, architecture, key features, and reported mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) for tree search solutions and the methods from the referenced papers.

Method
Solution 1 (TS) Solution 2 (TS) Solution 3 (TS) RE-Net 88 FURSformer 89 SCGLU-Net 90 MA-UNet 91 W13 Net92

Year 2025 2025 2025 2021 2023 2024 2022 2025

Architecture Type

Key Features / Techniques

CNN (UNet++)

`efficientnet-b7'

encoder, 8-fold TTA

Transformer(SegFormer) `mit-b1' encoder, 4-

fold TTA

CNN (U-Net)

`se_resnext101_32x4d'

encoder, 7-fold TTA

CNN (Regionbased) CNN+Transformer
CNN+Attention
Attention+UNet CNN (Lightweight)

Region

Context

Learning

Custom fusion mod-

ule

Spatial-Channel-

Global-Local block

Residual encoder

with simAM

Multi-stage encoding-

decoding

mIoU 0.81 0.82 0.80 0.762 0.753 0.666 0.619 0.580

73

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Table S15 | Prompt for Gemini Deep Research to generate ideas to integrate single-cell batch effects.
Prompt for Gemini Deep Research. I am developing new methods for winning single-cell batch integration competitions, as proposed by the Kaggle and extensively researched in the single-cell genomics community.
Briefly: Modelers are asked to develop a function, eliminate_batch_effect_fn, that transforms raw gene expression count data from multiple batches into a low-dimensional embedding or feature matrix. This transformed output should effectively remove technical variation (batch effects) while rigorously preserving biological information (e.g., cell type identity). The performance of these methods is evaluated against a suite of metrics that quantify both batch mixing and biological conservation.
The key problem is to develop a method that takes an AnnData object of raw gene expression counts with batch labels and returns an AnnData object with a batch-integrated low-dimensional embedding in the .obsm['X_emb'] field. The method must excel across a diverse set of evaluation metrics, including ASW Batch, ASW Label, ARI, NMI, Graph Connectivity, Isolated Labels ASW, Isolated Labels F1, kBET, iLISI, cLISI, PCR, and Cell Cycle Conservation Score, aiming to maximize their average.
The following principles should be obeyed when choosing models: * **Batch Effect Removal**: Prioritize techniques that explicitly model and mitigate batchspecific variations without collapsing biological signal. * **Biological Conservation**: Ensure the integrated representation retains and accurately reflects genuine biological differences, particularly cell type distinctions, as measured by clustering and silhouette metrics. * **Scalability and Efficiency**: Given the large dataset sizes (e.g., 329, 762 cells ū 2, 000 genes), models must be computationally efficient and avoid out-of-memory errors. * **Constraint Adherence**: The implementation must strictly avoid using cell_type information during integration and should primarily leverage scanpy, sklearn, numpy, scipy, tensorflow, torch, jax, or equivalent native implementations rather than specialized single-cell packages.
This task aims to develop a SUPERHUMAN METHOD for solving this problem.
Please give me 10 highly novel and creative ideas with detailed implementation notes for the set of methods I should explore for solving this task. I aim to create the best method for solving this problem, preferably creating the best ever method.
74

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Table S16 | Prompt for formatting Deep Research ideas into a structure similar to baseline method descriptions.
Prompt for formatting Deep Research ideas. Structure the given idea into the following format: <description> Your description about the method goes here. </description> <steps> Your list of steps to implement the method goes here. </steps> <notes> Strengths and weaknesses of the idea goes here. </notes>
75

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Table S17 | Prompt for guiding ERA to generate hybrid strategies. Prompt for guiding ERA to generate hybrid strategies. We have up until now done experiments with two major types of codes, that are described in detail below. PLEASE CREATE AN ALGORITHM THAT USES THE BEST PARTS OF BOTH STRATEGIES TO CREATE A HYBRID STRATEGY THAT IS TRULY WONDERFUL AND SCORES HIGHER THAN EITHER OF THE INDIVIDUAL STRATEGIES. [Output from Supplementary Table S7.]
76

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Table S18 | Prompt for summarizing existing batch integration methods. The prompt instructs the LLM to write a brief description and steps of the method. This generated summary then serves as part of an explicit instruction for tree search to create an optimized version of the existing batch integration method. Example output is shown in Supplementary Table S19.
Prompt for summarizing differences between two baseline methods. Given the following paper, please identify the main method being proposed. Then write a very short method description. This method description will be used to reproduce the method. DO NOT mention the algorithm by name. Your output must follow this format: <description> Your very short description goes here. </description> <steps> Your short list of steps goes here. </steps>
77

An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Supplementary Table S19 | Example of existing method description (BBKNN) given to ERA. ERA used this short method description to further optimize the method.
Example of existing method description (BBKNN) given to ERA. <description> This method performs batch correction by modifying the neighborhood graph construction step. For each cell, its nearest neighbors are identified independently within each batch, rather than across the entire combined dataset. The resulting batch-specific neighbor lists for each cell are then merged to create a single, integrated graph. This approach assumes that shared cell types exist across batches and that biological differences are greater than technical batch effects. </description> <steps>
1. For each cell, iterate through every batch in the dataset. 2. Find the k-nearest neighbors for the cell from within the current batch, based on a given
distance metric (e.g., Euclidean distance in PCA space). 3. After iterating through all batches, merge the identified neighbor sets for the cell into a
single neighborhood. 4. Repeat for all cells to construct a batch-corrected neighborhood graph. </steps>
78

