 GeneAgent: Self-verification Language Agent for
   Gene Set Knowledge Discovery using Domain
                           Databases

    Zhizheng Wanga, , Qiao Jina, , Chih-Hsuan Weia, Shubo Tiana, Po-Ting Laia,
             Qingqing Zhua, Chi-Ping Dayb, Christina Rossb, Zhiyong Lua, *

a National Center of Biotechnology Information (NCBI), National Library of Medicine (NLM),
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20894, USA
b Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute (NCI), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20894, USA

                                            Authors contributed equally
                                    * Correspondence: zhiyong.lu@nih.gov

Abstract

Gene set knowledge discovery is essential for advancing human functional genomics.
Recent studies have shown promising performance by harnessing the power of Large
Language Models (LLMs) on this task. Nonetheless, their results are subject to several
limitations common in LLMs such as hallucinations. In response, we present
GeneAgent, a first-of-its-kind language agent featuring self-verification capability. It
autonomously interacts with various biological databases and leverages relevant
domain knowledge to improve accuracy and reduce hallucination occurrences.
Benchmarking on 1,106 gene sets from different sources, GeneAgent consistently
outperforms standard GPT-4 by a significant margin. Moreover, a detailed manual
review confirms the effectiveness of the self-verification module in minimizing
hallucinations and generating more reliable analytical narratives. To demonstrate its
practical utility, we apply GeneAgent to seven novel gene sets derived from mouse
B2905 melanoma cell lines, with expert evaluations showing that GeneAgent offers
novel insights into gene functions and subsequently expedites knowledge discovery.

                                                                                                                     1
Introduction

Genomics has been a research interest of molecular biologists for a long time1,2,3,4.
Numerous mRNA expression experiments and proteomics investigations have yielded
sets of genes and proteins that may be differentially expressed or co-modified5,6. In
these cases, the fundamental premise is that the identified genes in a set should be
involved in the most relevant biological processes or molecular functions. Therefore, it
becomes imperative to elucidate the mechanisms underpinning co-abundance and
physical interactions among multiple genes.

Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), as the representative research in genomics,
aims to measure the over-representation or under-representation of biological
functions associated with a set of genes or proteins7,8,9,10. It typically involves similarity
matching with the gene functions predefined in the manually curated databases, such
as Gene Ontology (GO)11, Molecular Signature Database (MSigDB)12,13 and so on, by
rank-based comparison. However, gene sets exhibiting strong enrichment in the
existing databases have often been well-validated by previous research, thus an
increasing number of studies are shifting their focus towards gene sets that marginally
overlap with the known enrichment functions14. Their objective is to find worthy
biological functions from less-studied cases in GSEA and add the new biological
function to the existing databases.

Under this tendency, the powerful reasoning and rich biological context of large
language models (LLMs) has drawn the interest of researchers15,16. Recent works have
utilized instruction learning to prompt LLMs to discover biological mechanisms of gene
sets. Hu et al.14 evaluated the performance of five LLMs in gene set analysis. They
designed a set of instructions for LLMs to analyze the gene functions and generate a
brief biological process name for the given gene set. In their work, GPT-4 demonstrated
the highest performance in generating matching name to the ground truth. Using
standard LLMs, SPINDOCTOR17 introduces gene functional synopsis for summarizing
and generating multiple biological process names given a gene set. Moreover, the
application of GPT-4 in the candidate gene prioritization18 and genomics question
answer19 also proves the potential of LLMs in gene set knowledge discovery.

However, these studies only employed and evaluated standard large language models
(LLMs). Consequently, their results may exhibit common LLM issues such as

                                                                                                                     2
nondeterministic outputs and uncontrollably inaccurate results (i.e., hallucinations).
These shortcomings pose challenges in creating a reliable framework for accurately
generating the most prominent biological processes for gene sets and hinder the
objective interpretability of gene functions.

In response, we present GeneAgent, a language agent built upon GPT-4 to generate
biological process names for gene sets in an interpretable and contextually coherent
manner. Such capabilities are directly enabled by autonomously interacting with a
variety of biological databases through Web APIs. Utilizing relevant domain-specific
information retrieved from expert-curated databases, GeneAgent performs the fact
verification, offering objective evidence to support or refute the original output of an
LLM. We perform comparative experiments on gene sets from three distinct sources:
literature curation (GO); proteomics analysis (NeST system of human cancer proteins6);
and molecular functions (MSigDB). The evaluation results indicate that GeneAgent
significantly outperforms GPT-4 (as previously shown in Hu et al.14) in predicting the
accuracy of biological processes. Compared with SPINDOCTOR, GeneAgent provides
more informative gene functional synopsis for LLMs to generate relevant biological
terms. Importantly, GeneAgent achieves such enhanced performance by reducing the
occurrences of hallucinations common in standard LLMs.

In a real-world application, we assessed the performance of GeneAgent on seven
novel gene sets derived from the mouse B2905 melanoma cell lines. Our findings
reveal that GeneAgent not only achieves better performance compared to GPT-4 but
also offers valuable insights into novel gene functionalities, facilitating knowledge
discovery in the realm of biomedical research. The results of this use case also
demonstrates that GeneAgent is robust across different species.

                                                                                                                     3
Results

GeneAgent Workflow
GeneAgent aims to enhance the accuracy of gene set analysis by minimizing instances
of hallucinations, for which we designed a novel feature of autonomous interaction
with domain-specific databases, enabling GeneAgent to self-verify and refine the raw
output of LLMs (Method).

Specifically, the workflow of GeneAgent contains four crucial steps, generation, self-
verification, modification, and summarization (Figure 1a). GeneAgent creates the
process name and analytical texts of gene functions for the input gene set at first.
Afterwards, it activates selfVeri-Agent (Figure 1b) for the subsequent verification of the
process name and analytical texts respectively. Different stages of self-verification are
cascaded through the modification module. During each verification, GeneAgent
discerns the potential hallucinations by extracting claims from original contents and
comparing them against curated knowledge in domain-specific databases. The gene
names in claims serve as the basic queries to fetch reference functions from backend
databases via Web APIs. Once having the reference functions, selfVeri-Agent will
compile the verification report delineating a decision to original claims. Notably,
selfVeri-Agent prioritizes the "Process Name" before examining the "Analytical
Narratives", ensuring that the process name would be verified twice based on the
modified analytical texts. Last, GeneAgent summarizes all intermediate verification
reports to produce the final results. Such a cascade structure can improve the
traditional step-by-step chain-of-thinking (CoT)20 and achieve autonomous verification
for the inference process21, as compared with GPT-4 (CoT). In GeneAgent, we utilized
domain knowledge curated in 18 biomedical databases via four Web APIs (Method).

GeneAgent significantly outperforms the standard GPT-4.
We compared the accuracy of GeneAgent with GPT-4 proposed by Hu et al. in
generating the most relevant biological process name for a given gene set. The number
of genes in sets ranges from 3 to 456, with an average of 50.67 (Table 1a). Please note
that we implemented a masking strategy for APIs to ensure no databases is utilized for
its own gene sets during the self-verification process (Method).

                                                                                                                     4
Figure 1. Framework of GeneAgent for gene set knowledge discovery. a. The
cascade structure of GeneAgent. There are four steps: Generation, self-Verification,
Modification and Summarization. b. The workflow of selfVeri-Agent with an example of
"ERBB2, ERBB4, FGFR2, FGFR4, HRAS, KRAS is involved in RTK Signaling".

Table 1. The statistics for gene sets used in our study.

Table. 1a, gene sets used for empirical evaluation.

Dataset  #sets #genes  Avg.   Avg. words of all             Resource
                       genes  reference terms               Literal curation
                                                            Proteomics analysis
Gene Ontology 1,000 3 to 456 48.32 4.704                    Molecular function
NeST     50         5 to 323 18.96 2.214
MsigDB   56         4 to 200 112.00 2.980                       Resource

All      1,106 3 to 456 50.67 4.500                              Preclinical study
                                                                 of melanoma29
Table 1b, 7 novel gene sets tested in our case study.            (Mouse B2905
                                                                 melanoma cell
ID           #genes Reference term                               lines)

mmu05171 (HA-R) 36  Coronavirus disease - COVID-19
mmu03010 (HA-R) 35  Ribosome

mmu03010 (HA-S) 49  Ribosome
mmu05171 (HA-S) 47  Coronavirus disease - COVID-19

mmu04015 (HA-S) 27  Rap1 signaling pathway

mmu05100 (HA-S) 19  Bacterial invasion of epithelial cells

mmu05022 (LA-S) 24  Pathways of neurodegeneration -
                    multiple diseases

                                                                                      5
First, we evaluate ROUGE (Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation) scores22
(Method) between the generated names and their reference terms. Results (Figure 2a)
demonstrate that GeneAgent outperforms GPT-4 in generating the same word
sequence as reference terms. Among 1,106 gene sets where the average number of
words of reference terms is 4.50 (Table 1a), GeneAgent achieves much higher scores
than that by GPT-4. Notably, GeneAgent improves the Rouge-L (Longest Common
Subsequence) and Rouge-1 (1-gram) scores from 23.9% to 31.0% in MsigDB, and
Rouge-2 (2-gram) score from 7.4% to 15.5% accordingly.

Figure 2. Compared with GPT-4, GeneAgent generates biological process names
for gene sets with a higher similarity to their reference terms. a. The Rouge score of
GeneAgent in three datasets. b. Distribution of similarity scores in different dataset.
The P-values are calculated by a single-tailed T-test. ** denotes that p-value < 10-3. c.
Distribution of the percentile of semantic similarity between generated names and

                                                                                                                     6
their reference terms. The background set contains 12,320 terms consisting of 12,214
GO:BP terms used by Hu et al. and all available annotated terms in NeST (50) and
MsigDB (56). The plot shown is for the top 90th percentile. The values in each caption
denote the number of gene sets in GeneAgent and in GPT-4 at the top 98th percentile.
d. The proportion of significant enrichment terms in the tested terms based on the
exact match.

Next, we measured the semantic similarity between the generated names and their
reference terms based on the semantic embeddings encoded by a state-of-the-art
biomedical text encoder MedCPT23 (Method). The results (Figure 2b) indicate that the
average similarity score of GeneAgent is respectively 0.705, 0.761, and 0.736 in three
datasets, representing statistically significant improvements (p-value< 0.05) over the
GPT-4. Moreover, there are noticeable differences between names generated by
GeneAgent and GPT-4 (Table 2a). Therefore, we counted the number of gene sets at
different levels of similarity sores. GeneAgent generates 170 cases with similarity
scores exceeding 90% and 614 cases with similarity scores exceeding 70%. This
outcome is much higher than GPT-4 which only has 104 cases and 545 cases. Notably,
GeneAgent generates names with a similarity score of exactly 100% in 15 cases, while
GPT-4 only generates 3 such cases. A similarity score exceeding 90% indicates the
generated name has only subtle differences from its reference term, such as the
addition of "Metabolism". A similarity score between 70% and 90% indicates the
generated name is a broader concept of the biological process, which would be more
similar with the direct ancestor term of the gene set (Table 2b).

GeneAgent generates biological process names that are more related to reference
terms than other candidate terms.
Hu et al. introduced the evaluation of "background semantic similarity distribution" in
their study, which is estimated by calculating the percentile within a background set of
the semantic similarity between the generated name and the reference term. Therefore,
we designed the similar pipeline (Method) based on MedCPT to evaluate GeneAgent
and GPT-4. For example, for the gene set with the term "regulation of cardiac muscle
hypertrophy in response to stress", GeneAgent generates the name where the
semantic similarity is higher than 98.9% background terms (i.e., at 98.9% percentile)
(Extended Fig. 1a), while GPT-4 generates the name where semantic similarity is
higher than 60.2% background terms (i.e., at 60.2% percentile) (Extended Fig. 1b).

                                                                                                                     7
Table 2. Examples of gene sets that are assigned with different biological process names and similarity scores.

Table. 2a, gene sets named by different methods.

ID          Reference Term               GeneAgent                                GPT-4                            GSEA (g:Profiler)

GO:0032459  regulation of protein        Protein Sorting and Lipid                Intracellular Protein Transport  Regulation of protein
            oligomerization              Transport                                                                 oligomerization

NeST:69     Protein nuclear transport Nucleocytoplasmic Transport                 Telomere Maintenance and         protein localization to nucleus
MsigDB:69                                                                         Nuclear Transport
            Peroxisome                   Peroxisome Protein                                                        protein localization to
                                                                                  Peroxisome Biogenesis            peroxisome

Table 2b, gene sets named by GeneAgent with different similarity scores. Their direct ancestors in GO terms are obtained by g:Profiler.

ID          Reference Term                        GeneAgent                       Similarity Score  Direct ancestor in GO    Similarity with
                                                                                                    Terms                    ancestor
GO:0035108 limb morphogenesis                     Limb Morphogenesis              1.000             limb development         0.928 
                                                  Thiamine Transport and          0.989
GO:0015888 thiamine transport                     Metabolism                      0.957             vitamin transport        0.815 
                                                  Peroxisome Protein              0.772
MsigDB:69 Peroxisome                              Mesodermal Commitment                             peroxisome organization  0.915 
                                                  Pathway                         0.826             mesoderm                 0.829 
GO:0048319 axial mesoderm morphogenesis                                           0.746             morphogenesis
                                                  Ubiquitin Mediated Proteolysis  0.721
NeST:61     Cullin-RIng ubiquitin ligase                                                            ubiquitin ligase complex 0.910 
            complex                               Lymphocyte Activation
NeST:8      Immune system                         Response to Oxidative Stress                      leukocyte activation     0.929 
MsigDB:56   Reactive Oxygen Species Pathway                                                         response to stress       0.911 

                                                                                                                                          8
For 1,106 gene sets, we presented gene sets whose similarity scores between
generated names and reference terms are in the top 90th percentile among 12,320
background terms (Figure 2c). Results show that 76.9% (850) of names generated by
GeneAgent have a semantic similarity exceeding the 90th percentile (758 from GO, 46
from NeST, and 46 from MsigDB), while GPT-4 yields 742, 42, and 40 gene sets from the
respective databases (74.5% in total). In the top 98th percentile, GeneAgent also
exhibits a higher performance, with over 675 gene sets surpassing this threshold,
compared to 598 for GPT-4. Notably, there are 82 gene sets achieve a 100th percentile
in GeneAgent. Conversely, GPT-4 only records 43 instances.

GeneAgent generates informative synopsis of gene functions for summarizing
multiple enrichment terms.
Inspired by SPINDOCTOR17, which proposes the summarization of multiple plausible
biological process names from the available synopsis of gene functions, we performed
the enrichment term test (Method) by using GeneAgent's verification report to serve as
gene function synopsis. For comparison, we collected the narrative and ontological
synopsis of 56 gene sets in MsigDB from the SPINDOCTOR study, and also evaluated
the vanilla setting of no gene synopsis.

To assess the enrichment terms summarized from different gene synopsis against
those from conventional GSEA, we utilized g:Profiler24 to extract significant enrichment
terms (p-value  0.05) associated with gene sets as the ground truth. Then, we
quantified the extent to which generated terms overlapped with the significant terms
(Method). Our findings, employing an exact match criterion, reveal that 80.7% (296 out
of 367) of the LLM-generated terms aligned with significant enrichment terms when
using verification reports as the gene synopsis (Figure 2d). This proportion declines to
68.8% (282 out of 410) when employing ontological synopsis and further diminishes to
56.0% (195 out of 348) without using gene synopsis. As discussed in SPINDOCTOR,
unmatched terms may be instances where the model fabricates a biological function,
i.e., hallucination. Therefore, the significantly lower proportion (19.3%) of unmatched
terms in GeneAgent underscores its efficacy in mitigating hallucinations.

GeneAgent mitigates hallucinations by interacting with domain databases.
Hu et al. resort to human inspection to measure the reliability of their GPT-4 pipeline.
Conversely, GeneAgent incorporates the proposed self-verification module, acting as

                                                                                                                     9
an AI agent by autonomously interacting with the domain databases and obtaining
relevant knowledge to support or refute raw outputs of an LLM. Consequently, the
verification of GeneAgent no longer merely focuses on the response of LLMs but also
implements the supervisory of the inference process.

To elucidate its role in our method, we examined 15,903 claims generated by
GeneAgent and reported decisions of the selfVeri-Agent. Among these claims, 15,848
(99.6%) were successfully verified, with 84% supported, 1% partially supported, 8%
refuted, and remaining 7% unknown (Figure 3a). A marginal fraction (0.4%) of claims
were not verified due to the absence of gene names necessary for querying pertinent
databases through Web APIs.

During the self-verification process, 16% of the claims were not supported. These
unsupported claims were distributed across 794 gene sets, representing potential
candidates for revision. Of these, 703 (88.5%) were subsequently modified indeed.
Furthermore, we analyzed the utilization frequency of Web APIs and their backend
databases during the self-verification. The statistic shows a predominant utilization of
Enrichr25,26 and g:Profiler APIs for verifying process names, whereas the validation of
analytical texts mainly relies on E-utils27,28 and CustomAPI (Figure 3b). Additionally,
GeneAgent interacts with backend databases 19,273 times to verify 15,848 claims
(Figure 3c), suggesting that each decision is underpinned by evidence retrieved from at
least one database. To estimate the accuracy of the self-verification process of
GeneAgent, we manually reviewed 10 randomly selected gene sets from NeST with a
total of 132 claims, which received 88 supports, 15 partial supports, 28 refutes and 1
unknown by GeneAgent. Human inspections demonstrate that 92% (122) of decisions
are correct, indicating a high performance in the self-verification process (Figure 3d).

                                                                                                                   10
Figure 3. GeneAgent mitigates hallucinations by autonomously calling Web APIs to
interact with domain databases. a. Statistics of the 15,903 claims collected from the
1,106 gene sets, which contains the proportion of different decisions made by selfVeri-
Agent. b. Distribution (y-axis) of four Web APIs in verifying Process Name and
Analytical Texts (x-axis). c. The utilization frequency of different backend databases (x-
axis) in the self-verification stage of GeneAgent. d. The results of human verification for
the selected 132 claims derived from 10 gene sets.

GeneAgent offers insightful analytical narratives for novel gene sets.
As a real-world utilization case, we applied GeneAgent to seven gene sets derived from
the study of sub-clonal evolution on gene expression in mouse B2905 melanoma cell
lines29 (Method), with the number of genes in each set ranging from 19 to 49 (Table 1b).

                                                                                                                   11
These gene sets are identified from three subclones to the immunotherapy, i.e., high
aggression and resistant (HA-R), high aggression and sensitive (HA-S), and low
aggression and sensitive (LA-S). The results (Table 3) show that GeneAgent
outperforms GPT-4 in generating correct process names and drafting informative
analytical narratives.

On the one hand, two gene sets, i.e., mmu04015 (HA-S) and mmu05100 (HA-S), are
assigned with process names that exhibit perfect alignment with established reference
terms by domain experts. On the other hand, GeneAgent reveals novel biological
insights for specific genes in the gene set. Taking mmu05022 (LA-S) for instance,
GeneAgent suggests gene functions related to subunits of Complex I, IV, and V in the
mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes30, and further summarizes the "Respiratory
Chain Complex" for these genes (Extended Fig. 2a). However, GPT-4 categorizes these
genes into the "Oxidative Phosphorylation", which is a high-level biological process
based on the mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes31,32, without including the
gene Ndufa10 into this process. Similarly, GPT-4 does not include the gene Atxn1l into
"Neurodegeneration" and does not provide biological function of the gene Gpx7
(Extended Fig. 2b). Such results suggest that GeneAgent is more robust than GPT-4 on
novel gene sets, and that GeneAgent is applicable to non-human genes.

To further measure the quality of outputs generated by GeneAgent and GPT-4, we
formulated four criteria that are recognized as critical in practical uses by genomic
researchers: Relevance, Readability, Consistency, and Comprehensiveness (Method).
Two experts were recruited to manually assess and compare results (Table 3). In terms
of readability and consistency, GeneAgent and GPT-4 both demonstrate excellence
across numerous cases. But with regards to relevance and comprehensiveness,
GeneAgent outperforms GPT-4, which can be attributed to its access to domain-
specific databases during the verification stage, thereby offering potentially valuable
insights for experts. Nonetheless, there is one case, i.e., mmu03010 (HA-S), where
neither GeneAgent nor GPT-4 produces satisfactory results based on the four criteria.
GeneAgent generates a narrow process name "cytosolic ribosomes" that does not
cover mitochondrial ribosomal genes such as Mrpl10 and Mrps21, while GPT-4
generates a hallucinated response "Synthesis".

                                                                                                                   12
Table 3. Human annotation for the output of GeneAgent and GPT-4 in the case study. "GPT-4" is the abbreviation of GPT-4. "" denotes the better one in
each criterion. "" denotes the better one in final decision. "×" denotes unreasonableness in output. "Blank cells" denotes both perform well.

                                                        Gene                     Better Output Annotated by Genomic Experts

           Generated by          Generated by           Coverage in Relevance    Readability  Consistency  Comprehensive     Final Decision
ID                               GeneAgent
                                                        the Output GPT-4 GeneAgent GPT-4 GeneAgent GPT-4 GeneAgent GPT-4 GeneAgent GPT-4 GeneAgent
           GPT-4

mmu05171 Ribosomal Protein Cytosolic Ribosome           33/36                                                                   

(HA-R)    Synthesis              and Protein Synthesis

mmu03010  Ribosomal Protein

(HA-R)    Synthesis and          Cytosolic Ribosome     34/35                                                                   

          Assembly

mmu03010 Ribosomal Protein       Cytosolic Ribosome     13/49                                                                ×  ×

(HA-S)    Synthesis

mmu05171 Ribosomal Protein       Cytosolic Ribosome

(HA-S)    Synthesis              Assembly and Protein   47/47                                                                   

                                 Synthesis

mmu04015 MAPK/ERK Pathway Rap1 Signaling                27/27                                                                   

(HA-S)    Regulation             Pathway

mmu05100  Caveolae-Mediated      Bacterial Invasion of

(HA-S)    Endocytosis and Actin  Epithelial Cells       19/19                                                                

          Remodeling

mmu05022  Oxidative              Neurodegeneration      23/24                                                                   
(LA-S)    Phosphorylation and    and Respiratory Chain
          Neurodegeneration      Complex

                                                                                                                                13
Discussion

Self-verification in GeneAgent. Recent research has increasingly focused on the
"self-verification" strategy within LLMs33,34,35. These studies utilized the same LLM to
verify its own outputs, which may also lead to overconfidence in the raw results, and
potentially heightens the risk of failing to discover novel insights, as the models might
not adequately question or critique their initial findings36. Differently, GeneAgent
leverages established knowledge from manually curated domain-specific databases to
verify the initial outputs (Figure 1b), which can not only mitigate the overconfidence in
the initial results, but aids in reducing potential hallucinations and enhancing the
reliability of LLMs.

GeneAgent versus GSEA. As an indispensable tool for gene set analysis, GSEA
produces the most informative term for gene sets along with the statistical information.
In GeneAgent, we included four different APIs (e.g., g:Profiler) to ascertain the
agreement of gene sets with those represented by expert-curated databases. Through
the comparison between generated names and the most significant enrichment term
produced by the g:Profiler tool, we found that GeneAgent surpasses GESA in terms of
both similarity (Extended Fig. 3a) and ROUGE scores (Extended Fig. 3b). In addition to
superior performance, GeneAgent can generate associated narratives, which
increases the transparency of AI results and explains the biological roles of genes.
Therefore, GeneAgent can essentially be seen as a system that merges the strengths of
both LLMs and GSEA, delivering performance that surpasses each individual system.

Importance of expert-curated domain databases. In addition to the eight databases
utilized in the GSEA tool, we have incorporated four databases for pathway analysis
and six for gene functional verification (Figure 3c). These databases formed a cohesive
system that facilitates the discovery of gene set knowledge by providing a reliable
foundation of gene functions. The databases used in GSEA are complemented by the
others, especially for examining the consistency of individual genes and their shared
functions. This is particularly vital for uncovering latent biological functions among
multiple genes, as it offers detailed insights into the characteristics of individual genes.
Taken together, the domain-specific databases curated by experts are essential for
enhancing the effectiveness of GeneAgent in the discovery of gene set knowledge.

                                                                                                                   14
Error analysis. We analyzed three representative gene sets that received low similarity
scores across the three datasets, along with their analytical narratives and verification
reports (Extended Tab. 1). The suboptimal performance of GeneAgent in those cases
can be primarily attributed to two factors: the erroneous rejection of an accurate
process name, such as "EGFR Signaling Pathway Regulation" and "Prostate Cancer
Progression"; and the incorrect endorsement of an originally dissimilar process name,
exemplified by "Catecholamine Biosynthesis". Employing additional relevant domain
databases in the self-verification stage or engineering a more effectiveness prompts in
the modification stage may help alleviate such issues.
Limitations In this work we only selected GPT-4 as the backbone model given its
superior performance. While other LLMs can also be explored, Hu et al., shows that
GPT-4 outperforms GPT-3.5, Gemini-Pro, Mixtral-Instruct and Llama 2. While the self-
verification step is shown to be effective, GeneAgent might still generate the biological
process names that are highly different from their reference terms, which can be
potentially alleviated by employing more relevant domain databases in future works.
Finally, our study has not attempted to pre-process the gene set such as removing the
genes that are non-coherent with other genes from a gene set. Nonetheless,
GeneAgent demonstrates remarkable robustness across various gene sets and
different species, and effectively mitigates hallucinations by automatically interacting
with domain-specific databases.

                                                                                                                   15
References

1. Lockhart, David J., et al. "Expression monitoring by hybridization to high-density
    oligonucleotide arrays." Nature biotechnology 14.13 (1996): 1675-1680.

2. Ulitsky, Igor, and David P. Bartel. "lincRNAs: genomics, evolution, and mechanisms."
    Cell 154.1 (2013): 26-46.

3. Moraes, Fernanda, and Andréa Góes. "A decade of human genome project
    conclusion: Scientific diffusion about our genome knowledge." Biochemistry and
    Molecular Biology Education 44.3 (2016): 215-223.

4. Sweeney, Timothy E., et al. "A community approach to mortality prediction in sepsis
    via gene expression analysis." Nature communications 9.1 (2018): 694.

5. Zimmerman, Amber J., et al. "A psychiatric disease-related circular RNA controls
    synaptic gene expression and cognition." Molecular psychiatry 25.11 (2020): 2712-
    2727.

6. Zheng, Fan, et al. "Interpretation of cancer mutations using a multiscale map of
    protein systems." Science 374.6563 (2021): eabf3067.

7. Subramanian, Aravind, et al. "Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based
    approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles." Proceedings of the
    National Academy of Sciences 102.43 (2005): 15545-15550.

8. Backes, Christina, et al. "GeneTrail--advanced gene set enrichment analysis."
    Nucleic acids research 35. suppl_2 (2007): W186-W192.

9. Hung, Jui-Hung, et al. "Gene set enrichment analysis: performance evaluation and
    usage guidelines." Briefings in bioinformatics 13.3 (2012): 281-291.

10. Geistlinger, Ludwig, et al. "Toward a gold standard for benchmarking gene set
    enrichment analysis." Briefings in bioinformatics 22.1 (2021): 545-556.

11. Ashburner, Michael, et al. "Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology." Nature
    genetics 25.1 (2000): 25-29.

12. Liberzon, Arthur, et al. "The molecular signatures database hallmark gene set
    collection." Cell systems 1.6 (2015): 417-425.

13. Liberzon, Arthur, et al. "Molecular signatures database (MSigDB) 3.0." Bioinformatics
    27.12 (2011): 1739-1740.

14. Hu, Mengzhou, et al. "Evaluation of large language models for discovery of gene set
    function." arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04019 (2023).

15. Tian, Shubo, et al. "Opportunities and challenges for ChatGPT and large language
    models in biomedicine and health." Briefings in Bioinformatics 25.1 (2024): bbad493.

16. Pal, Soumen, et al. "A domain-specific next-generation large language model (LLM)
    or ChatGPT is required for biomedical engineering and research." Annals of
    Biomedical Engineering (2023): 1-4.

17. Joachimiak, Marcin P., et al. "Gene set summarization using large language models."
    ArXiv (2023).

18. Toufiq, Mohammed, et al. "Harnessing large language models (LLMs) for candidate
    gene prioritization and selection." Journal of Translational Medicine 21.1 (2023): 728.

19. Jin, Qiao, et al. "Genegpt: Augmenting large language models with domain tools for
    improved access to biomedical information." Bioinformatics 40.2 (2024): btae075.

                                                                                                                   16
20. Kojima, Takeshi, et al. "Large language models are zero-shot reasoners." Advances in
    neural information processing systems 35 (2022): 22199-22213.

21. Gao, Luyu, et al. "Rarr: Researching and revising what language models say, using
    language models." Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
    Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 2023.

22. Lin, Chin-Yew. "Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries." Text
    summarization branches out. 2004.

23. Jin, Qiao, et al. "MedCPT: Contrastive Pre-trained Transformers with large-scale
    PubMed search logs for zero-shot biomedical information retrieval." Bioinformatics
    39.11 (2023): btad651.

24. Kolberg, Liis, et al. "g: Profiler--interoperable web service for functional enrichment
    analysis and gene identifier mapping (2023 update)." Nucleic Acids Research (2023):
    gkad347.

25. Chen, Edward Y., et al. "Enrichr: interactive and collaborative HTML5 gene list
    enrichment analysis tool." BMC bioinformatics 14.1 (2013): 1-14.

26. Kuleshov, Maxim V., et al. "Enrichr: a comprehensive gene set enrichment analysis
    web server 2016 update." Nucleic acids research 44.W1 (2016): W90-W97.

27. Sayers, Eric W., et al. "Database resources of the national center for biotechnology
    information." Nucleic acids research 49.D1 (2021): D10.

28. Wheeler, David L., et al. "Database resources of the national center for
    biotechnology information." Nucleic acids research 36. suppl_1 (2007): D13-D21.

29. Hirsch, M. G., et al. "Stochastic modelling of single-cell gene expression adaptation
    reveals non-genomic contribution to evolution of tumor subclones." bioRxiv (2024).

30. Davies, Karen M., Thorsten B. Blum, and Werner Kühlbrandt. "Conserved in situ
    arrangement of complex I and III2 in mitochondrial respiratory chain
    supercomplexes of mammals, yeast, and plants." Proceedings of the National
    Academy of Sciences 115.12 (2018): 3024-3029.

31. Vercellino, Irene, and Leonid A. Sazanov. "The assembly, regulation and function of
    the mitochondrial respiratory chain." Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 23.2
    (2022): 141-161.

32. Deshpande OA, and Mohiuddin SS. Biochemistry, Oxidative Phosphorylation. 2023
    Jul 31. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2024 Jan­.

33. Gero, Zelalem, et al. "Self-verification improves few-shot clinical information
    extraction." arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00024 (2023).

34. Weng, Yixuan, et al. "Large language models are better reasoners with self-
    verification." arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09561 (2022).

35. Zhou, Aojun, et al. "Solving challenging math word problems using gpt-4 code
    interpreter with code-based self-verification." arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07921 (2023).

36. Small, Christopher T., et al. "Opportunities and risks of LLMs for scalable
    deliberation with Polis." arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11932 (2023).

                                                                                                                   17
Online Method

Overview of GeneAgent.
GeneAgent is an AI agent composed of four key modules: generation, self-verification,
modification, and summarization. Each module is triggered by a specific instruction
tailored to its function. The goal of GeneAgent is to generate a representative biological
process name () for a set of genes, denoted as  = {|= 1}. Each gene  is this set is
identified by its unique name, and the  is associated with a specific reference
biological term (). When provided with an , GeneAgent outputs an , accompanied
by analytical texts () detailing the functions of the genes involved, which can be
formally defined as () = (, ). In our research, we utilized the GPT-4
model (version 20230613 via the Azure OpenAI API) with the temperature parameter set
to 0, ensuring consistent and stable output.

Pipeline of generating the most prominent biological process names for gene sets.
The gene set in the dataset  is separated by commas (",") and serves as input
parameters for the instruction of the generation () module. Following the generation
stage,  is assigned an initial process name () and corresponding analytical
narratives (), i.e., () = ( , ).

Afterwards, GeneAgent generates a list of claims for  by using statements like "be
involved in" and "related to" to generate hypothesis for gene set and its process name.
After that, GeneAgent activates selfVeri-Agent (Figure 1b) to verify each claim in the list.
Initially, selfVeri-Agent extracts all gene names and the process name from the claims.
Subsequently, it utilizes the gene names to invoke the appropriate APIs for the
autonomous interaction with domain-specific databases, employing their established
knowledge to validate the accuracy of the process name. Finally, it assembles a
verification report () that contains findings and decisions related to the original claim.

Next, GeneAgent initiates the modification () stage to either revise or retain the 
based on the findings in the . If the  is determined to revise by GeneAgent, the 
is also instructed to be modified accordingly, i.e., (, , ) =
(, ). Following this, GeneAgent applies the self-verification to the  to
verify the gene functions in the analytical narratives while checking the new process

                                                                                                                   18
name again. This step is also started with generating a list of claims for different gene
names and their functional terms and is finished with deriving a new verification report
() by selfVeri-Agent.

Finally, based on the report , both  and  are modified according to the
summarization () instruction to generate the final biological process name () and the
analytical narratives () of gene functions, i.e.,  (, , ) = (, ).

Domain-specific databases configured in selfVeri-Agent.
In the self-verification stage, we have configured four Web APIs to access 18 domain
databases (Figure 3c).

g:Profiler24 (https://biit.cs.ut.ee/gprofiler/page/apis) is an open-source tool for GSEA. In
GeneAgent, we used eight domain-specific databases such as GO, KEGG37, Reactome38,
WikiPathways39, Transfac40, miRTarBase41, CORUM protein complexes42, and Human
Phenotype Ontology43 to perform enrichment analysis for the gene set. For each gene
set, we employed g:GOSt interface to identify top-5 enrichment terms along with their
descriptions.

Enrichr25,26 (https://maayanlab.cloud/Enrichr/help\#api) is also a valuable tool for GSEA.
We configured four databases related to the pathway analysis in the Enrichr API, i.e.,
KEGG_2021_Human, Reactome_2022, BioPlanet_201944, and MsigDB_Hallmark_2020.
In GeneAgent, we selected to return the top-5 standard pathway names via databases.

E-utils27,28 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) is an API designed for accessing the NCBI
databases for various biological data. In GeneAgent, we augment our repository of
functional information associated with an individual gene by invoking its Gene database
and PubMed database. Different databases can be used by defining the db parameter
as gene or pubmed in the basic API.

CustomAPI is our custom API library, developed using four gene-centric databases

                                                                                                                   19
related to gene-disease, gene-domain, PPI, and gene-complex. In GeneAgent, we invoke
the appropriate database by specifying the desired interface at the end of the basic API,
and subsequently retrieving the top-10 relevant IDs to gene functions. These IDs are
then used to match their names in the corresponding database.

Notably, we implemented a masking strategy for APIs and databases during the
evaluation to ensure unbiased assessments across various gene sets. Specifically, we
removed the g:Profiler API when assessing gene sets from the Gene Ontology dataset
because it can perfectly derive their reference terms. Similarly, we masked the
"MsigDB_Hallmark_2020" database within the Enrichr API when evaluating gene sets
from MsigDB.

Calculation of ROUGE score.
Three distinct Rouge metrics22 are employed to access the recall of generated names
relative to reference terms: i.e., Rouge-1 and Rouge-2, which based on n-gram, and
Rouge-L, which utilizes the longest common subsequence (LCS). The calculation
formulas are as follows:

Rouge-N  =    ()      ,  N = 1, 2                                       (1)
                  ()

         =  (, )
                    

         =  (,)                                                         (2)
                    

{Rouge-L    = (1+2)

                  +2

Here, the  denotes the reference terms and  denotes the generated names. 

and  is the token length of  and  respectively.  is a hyper-parameter.

Calculation of semantic similarity.
After generating biological process name () for the gene set , the semantic similarity
between  and its reference term () is computed by MedCPT23, a state-of-the-art
model for language representation in the biomedical domain. It is built based on
PubMedBERT45 with further training using 255 million query-article pairs from PubMed
search logs. Compared with SapBERT46, BioBERT47, etc., MedCPT has higher
performance in encoding the semantics of biomedical texts.

                                                                                                                   20
    a) Calculation of semantic similarity between  and 
First,  and  are encoded by MedCPT into embeddings, and then the cosine similarity
between their two embeddings is calculated, yielding a score in the interval [-1, 1].
Finally, we take the average value of all similarity scores to evaluate the performance of
GeneAgent on gene sets in one dataset.

    b) Calculation of background semantic similarity distribution
First,  is paired with all possible terms   , where  denotes 12,320 background
terms consisting of 12,214 GO:BP terms in GO, and all available terms in NeST (50) and
MsigDB (56). Then,  and  are fed into MedCPT to get the embeddings, i.e.,  and .
Afterwards, we calculated the cosine similarity for each < , > pair. Finally, we ranked
all cosine scores from large to small and observed the position where the pair < ,  >
( is the reference term for ) located in. The higher position denotes the generated
names have a higher similarity score to their reference terms than other terms.

Pipeline of enrichment term test based on verification reports of GeneAgent.
For gene sets in MsigDB, we first collected its verification report produced by GeneAgent.
Afterwards, each gene set and the associated report were used as the parameters of the
instruction for the GPT-4. Therefore, GPT-4 can summarize multiple enrichment terms
for the given gene set. Finally, we employed the exact match to evaluate the accuracy of
the tested terms summarized by the GPT-4. Specifically, for each gene set in the
evaluation, we first utilized g:Profiler to perform GSEA, where the p-value threshold is
set to 0.05. Then, we obtained significant enrichment terms for the given gene sets as
the ground truth. Finally, we counted the number of tested terms summarized by GPT-4
that correctly match the significant enrichment term of each gene set. One tested term
is deemed accurate only when all words are exactly matched with all words of one term
in the ground truth. One tested term is considered as accurate only when there is an
exact match between all the words in the tested term and one term in the ground truth.

Human checking for the decisions in the verification report of GeneAgent.
We randomly selected 10 gene sets from NeST with 132 claims for human inspection.
There are two parts in the verification report: the claims and the decisions to the claims
along with evidence. Annotators were asked to label the selfVeri-Agent decisions (i.e.,
supports, partial supports, and refutes) for each claim and judge whether such
decisions are correct, partially correct, or incorrect, which follows the study of natural

                                                                                                                   21
language inference48 and fact verification49. For each claim, the annotators need to
make a judgment based on assertions of the gene (set) functions provided in the
evidence:

    a) Correct: This category applies when GeneAgent's decision completely aligns
         with the evidence supporting the original claim. The decision is considered
         correct if it accurately reflects the evidence documented, demonstrating a clear
         and direct connection between the claim and the supporting data.

    b) Partially correct: It is designated when GeneAgent's decision requires indirect
         reasoning or when the decision, although related, does not completely align
         with the direct evidence provided. This occurs when the decision is somewhat
         supported by the evidence but requires additional inference or context to be
         fully understood as supporting the original claim.

    c) Incorrect: This category is used when GeneAgent's decision either contradicts
         the evidence or lacks any substantiation from the verification report. It includes
         decisions that misinterpret the evidence or ignore significant aspects of the
         evidence.

Melanomas gene sets in the preclinical study.
The mouse B2905 melanoma cell line, which is derived from a tumor from the M4 model,
where melanoma is induced by UV irradiation on pups of hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF)-transgenic C57BL/6 mice50. Specifically, 24 single cells were isolated from the
parental B2905 melanoma line and then expanded to become individual clonal sublines
(i.e., C1 to C24)51. Each of these 24 sublines was subjected to whole exome sequencing
and full-transcript single-cell RNA (scRNA) sequencing by Smart-seq2 protocol. The
single nucleotide variants called from exome sequencing results were used to build the
tumor progression tree for all the 24 sublines. Based on the in vivo growth and
therapeutic responses of the sublines in the clusters, three clades are named as "high
aggressiveness and resistant (HA-R)", "high aggressiveness and sensitive (HA-S)", and
"low aggressiveness and sensitive (LA-S)"29. Afterwards, EvoGeneX52 is applied to the
scRNA data of the 24 clonal sublines, where the phylogenetic relation is defined by the
mutation-based tumor progression tree, to identify adaptively up-regulated and down-
regulated genes in each of HA-R, HA-S, and LA-S clades. The adaptively up- and down-
regulated gene lists were then subjected to the KEGG pathway enrichment analysis. The
genes in the enrichments and their enriched terms are used to test the GeneAgent.

                                                                                                                   22
Human annotation for outputs in the case study.
For the assessment of different outputs between GeneAgent and GPT-4, we established
four criteria following the existing studies on the evaluation of LLM53,54.

    a) Relevance: Assess whether the content about genes pertinently reflects their
         functions, providing value to biologists.

    b) Readability: Evaluate the fluency and clarity of the writing, ensuring it is easily
         understandable.

    c) Consistency: Determine whether the analytical narratives align consistently
         with the specified process name.

    d) Comprehensiveness: Verify whether the outputs provide a comprehensive
         understanding of gene functions.

Based on these four established criteria, two experts are tasked with evaluating the final
responses from the outputs of GPT-4 and GeneAgent. They operate the annotation
under a blind assessment protocol, where they are unaware of the algorithm that
produced each response. Their main responsibility is to annotate and compare the
preference for outputs generated by GPT-4 versus GeneAgent. They carefully review and
select the more effective response, justifying their selections with relevant comments.
Following a comprehensive synthesis of all feedback, these two experts are required to
make a definitive judgment on which output most effectively satisfies the users'
requirement.

                                                                                                                   23
References

37. Kanehisa, Minoru, et al. "KEGG for taxonomy-based analysis of pathways and
    genomes." Nucleic acids research 51.D1 (2023): D587-D592.

38. Gillespie, Marc, et al. "The reactome pathway knowledgebase 2022." Nucleic acids
    research 50.D1 (2022): D687-D692.

39. Martens, Marvin, et al. "WikiPathways: connecting communities." Nucleic acids
    research 49.D1 (2021): D613-D621.

40. Matys, Volker, et al. "TRANSFAC® and its module TRANSCompel®: transcriptional
    gene regulation in eukaryotes." Nucleic acids research 34. suppl_1 (2006): D108-
    D110.

41. Huang, Hsi-Yuan, et al. "miRTarBase update 2022: an informative resource for
    experimentally validated miRNA­target interactions." Nucleic acids research 50.D1
    (2022): D222-D230.

42. Tsitsiridis, George, et al. "CORUM: the comprehensive resource of mammalian
    protein complexes­2022." Nucleic acids research 51.D1 (2023): D539-D545.

43. Köhler, Sebastian, et al. "The human phenotype ontology in 2021." Nucleic acids
    research 49.D1 (2021): D1207-D1217.

44. Huang, Ruili, Ivan Grishagin, and Deborah Ngan. "The NCATS BioPlanet­an
    integrated platform for exploring the universe of cellular signaling pathways for
    toxicology, systems biology, and chemical genomics." Frontiers in pharmacology 10
    (2019): 437284.

45. Gu, Yu, et al. "Domain-specific language model pretraining for biomedical natural
    language processing." ACM Transactions on Computing for Healthcare (HEALTH) 3.1
    (2021): 1-23.

46. Liu, Fangyu, et al. "Self-Alignment Pretraining for Biomedical Entity
    Representations." Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American
    Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
    Technologies. 2021.

47. Lee, Jinhyuk, et al. "BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical language representation
    model for biomedical text mining." Bioinformatics 36.4 (2020): 1234-1240.

48. Romanov, Y., and Shivade, C. "MedNLI - A Natural Language Inference Dataset for
    the Clinical Domain." Proceedings of the 2nd Clinical Natural Language Processing
    Workshop, 2019, pp. 1-6.

49. Wadden, D., Lo, K., Ungar, L. H., and Hajishirzi, H. "SciFact: Verification of Scientific
    Claims with Evidence from the Literature." Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
    Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2020, pp. 918-927.

50. Pérez-Guijarro, Eva, et al. "Multimodel preclinical platform predicts clinical
    response of melanoma to immunotherapy." Nature medicine 26.5 (2020): 781-791.
                                                                                                                   24
51. Gruen, Charli, et al. "Melanoma clonal subline analysis uncovers heterogeneity-
    driven immunotherapy resistance mechanisms." bioRxiv (2023): 2023-04.

52. Pal, Soumitra, Brian Oliver, and Teresa M. Przytycka. "Stochastic modeling of gene
    expression evolution uncovers tissue-and sex-specific properties of expression
    evolution in the Drosophila genus." Journal of Computational Biology 30.1 (2023):
    21-40.

53. Wang, Jiaan, et al. "Is ChatGPT a Good NLG Evaluator? A Preliminary Study."
    Proceedings of EMNLP Workshop. 2023.

54. Fabbri, Alexander R., et al. "Summeval: Re-evaluating summarization evaluation."
    Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 9 (2021): 391-409.

                                                                                                                   25
Extended Data Figures and Tables

Extended Fig. 1. Semantic similarity between generated name and reference term
(gray dashed line, x-axis) is converted to the percentage of all terms in the
background set with lower similarity to the generated name (gray dashed line, y-
axis). a. Example of the reference term ("regulation of cardiac muscle hypertrophy in
response to stress") and the generated name of GeneAgent ("Regulation of Cellular
Response to Stress"). The similarity of reference term and generated name is 0.695,
which is higher than other 98.9% terms in the background set. b. Example of the
reference term ("regulation of cardiac muscle hypertrophy in response to stress") and
the generated name of GPT-4 ("Calcium Signaling Pathway Regulation"). The similarity of
reference term and generated name is 0.500, which is higher than other 60.2% terms in
the background set.

                                                                                                                   26
Extended Fig. 2. Example of gene functions concluded by GeneAgent and GPT-4. The
example shown for the gene set "mmu05022 (LA-S)" in the case study. a. GeneAgent
takes the "Neurodegeneration and Respiratory Chain Complex" as the most prominent
biological process. Complex I is the ubiquinone oxidoreductase, Complex IV is the
cytochrome c oxidase and Complex V is the ATP synthase. b. GPT-4 (Hu et al.) takes the
"Oxidative Phosphorylation and Neurodegeneration" as the most prominent biological
process.

                                                                                                                   27
Extended Fig. 3. Complementary experiments between the GeneAgent and the
conventional GSEA (g:Profiler). a. Comparison of semantic similarity. b. Comparison
of Rouge scores.

                                                                                                                   28
Extended Tab. 1. Gene Sets with low semantic similarity score. XXX (**) denotes the name generated by GPT-4 (Hu et al.) and the semantic similarity to the
reference term. XXX denotes the enrichment results returned by the domain databases.

ID          Reference       Name generated       Similarity  Major Evidence in the Verification Report                          Root Causes of Poor
            Term            by GeneAgent         Score                                                                          Performance

NEST:169    Neg Regulation  Cell Proliferation   0.470       The claim that the EGFR Signaling Pathway Regulation (0.739) is    Incorrectly refute original Process
            EGFR            and Adhesion                     regulated by the gene set AKT1, CTNNB1, EGF, EGFR, NF2, PTEN       Name: The original similar Process
                            Regulation                       is not directly supported by the data. The top-5 enrichment        Name generated by standard GPT-4
                                                             function names of the regulation, signaling pathway, and complex   is refuted.
                                                             for the given gene set include Endometrial cancer, Prostate
                                                             cancer, Embryonic stem cell pluripotency pathways, and
                                                             Breast cancer.

MsigDB:12   Androgen        Cytoplasmic Protein  0.384       [1]. The gene set provided is indeed associated with prostate      Incorrectly refute original Process
            Response        Interaction and                  cancer progression (0.615). The top-5 enrichment function          Name: The original similar Process
                            Regulation                       names for this gene set include "cytoplasm", "prostate;            Name generated by standard GPT-4
                                                             glandular cells [High]", "prostate; glandular cells [Medium]",     is supported but the is refuted by the
                                                             "extracellular exosome", and "extracellular vesicle".              verification for genes in the
                                                             [2]. The claim that the gene CDK6 is associated with the           Analytical Narratives.
                                                             progression of prostate cancer cannot be verified.
                                                             [3]. The claim that KLK2 and KLK3 genes are well-known
                                                             biomarkers for prostate cancer cannot be fully verified.

GO:0046684  response to     Catecholamine        0.369       The claim that the process of Catecholamine Biosynthesis           Incorrectly support the original
            pyrethroid      Biosynthesis                     (0.369) is facilitated by the human gene set DDC, TH, SCN2B is     Process Name: The original
                                                             supported. The gene set DDC, TH is involved in several biological  dissimilar Process name generated
                                                             pathways related to neurotransmitter disorders, dopamine           by standard GPT-4 is supported.
                                                             metabolism, biogenic amine biosynthesis, and amine-derived
                                                             hormones. However, the gene SCN2B does not appear to be
                                                             involved in these pathways.

                                                                                                                                                     29
Data Availability

Publicly available gene sets were used in this study. Gene Ontology (2023-11-15 release)
and the selected NeST gene sets used in the study of Hu et al. are available at
https://github.com/idekerlab/llm_evaluation_for_gene_set_interpretation/blob/main/da
ta/. Gene sets used in the MsigDB dataset are the subset of data used in the research of
https://github.com/monarch-initiative/talisman-paper/tree/main/genesets/human.

Author contributions

Z.W., Q.J., and Z.L. conceived this study. Z.W. and Q.J. implemented the data collection
and model construction. Z.W. conducted model evaluation and manuscript drafting.
C.W., S.T., and P.L. developed the CustomAPI Library. S.T., C.W. and Z.W. developed the
demo website of GeneAgent. C.D. provided the gene sets derived from the mouse
B2905 melanoma cell line. Z.W. and Q.Z. contributed to the data annotation in the self-
verification. C.D. and C.R. contributed to the data annotation in the case study. Z.L.
supervised the study. All authors contributed to writing the manuscript and approved
the submitted version.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Xiuying Chen, M.G. Hirsch, and Teresa M. Przytycka for their
helpful discussion of this work. This research is supported by the NIH Intramural
Research Program, National Library of Medicine.

                                                                                                                   30
