arXiv:2412.17596v4 [cs.CL] 23 Feb 2026  Evaluating LLMs' Divergent Thinking Capabilities for
                                            Scientific Idea Generation with Minimal Context

                                               Kai Ruan1, Xuan Wang2, Jixiang Hong1, Peng Wang3, Yang Liu4,5, Hao Sun1,°

                                                      1Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
                                                      2College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

                                                                                          3Bank of China, Beijing, China
                                                   4School of Engineering Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
                                           5State Key Laboratory of Nonlinear Mechanics, Institute of Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,

                                                                                                     Beijing, China

                                                                                 *Corresponding author (haosun@ruc.edu.cn)

                                                                                                        Abstract

                                                    Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate remarkable capabilities in scientific tasks such
                                                as literature analysis and experimental design. For instance, these models excel at accurately
                                                extracting key findings from papers or generating coherent experimental procedures. However,
                                                existing evaluation benchmarks primarily assess performance using rich contextual inputs.
                                                We introduce LiveIdeaBench, a comprehensive benchmark evaluating LLMs' scientific idea
                                                generation by assessing divergent thinking capabilities using single-keyword prompts. Drawing
                                                from Guilford's creativity theory, our benchmark employs a dynamic panel of state-of-the-art
                                                LLMs to assess generated ideas across five dimensions: originality, feasibility, fluency, flexibility,
                                                and clarity. Through experimentation with over 40 leading models across 1,180 keywords spanning
                                                22 scientific domains, we reveal that the scientific idea generation capabilities measured by our
                                                benchmark, are poorly predicted by standard metrics of general intelligence scores. Our results
                                                demonstrate that models like QwQ-32B-preview achieve creative performance comparable to
                                                models such as claude-3.7-sonnet:thinking, despite significant gaps in their general intelligence
                                                scores. These findings highlight the need for specialized evaluation benchmarks for scientific idea
                                                generation and suggest that enhancing these idea generation capabilities in LLMs may require
                                                different training strategies than those used for improving general problem-solving abilities. Such
                                                strategies could potentially enable a wider range of AI tools tailored for different stages of the
                                                scientific process.

                                        Introduction

                                            The advancement of scientific knowledge relies heavily on creative thinking and the generation
                                        of novel hypotheses. The ability to envision new possibilities and formulate testable explanations is
                                        crucial for scientific progress. In recent years, LLMs have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
                                        various scientific tasks, from literature analysis to experimental design, suggesting their potential as
                                        powerful tools for augmenting scientific discovery [1­3]. Concurrently, machine learning techniques
                                        are being applied to forecast future research directions by analyzing the structure and evolution
                                        of scientific knowledge networks [4]. As Rafner et al. [5] note, these generative AI systems now

                                                                                                        1
perform comparably to humans on some creativity tests and could potentially enhance the creative
capabilities of knowledge workers worldwide.

    To understand the potential of AI in this domain, early theoretical work on human creativity
offers valuable insights for our investigation. In their seminal 1962 work, Getzels and Jackson [7]
examined the relationship between intelligence and creativity, particularly among "gifted" students.
Their study yielded two crucial findings: first, high IQ does not necessarily equate to high creativity;
and second, creativity and intelligence function as relatively independent traits. These observations
led to the threshold theory [7, 8], proposing that intelligence is necessary but not sufficient for
creativity, with its influence diminishing beyond a certain threshold.

    However, subsequent research has yielded mixed evidence for this theory. While Gralewski et
al. [12] and Jauk et al. [9] found some empirical support under certain conditions, some studies
found no support [10, 11], challenging the threshold concept. More recent work by Weiss et al. [16]
concluded that the relationship is likely linear with no evidence supporting a threshold. These

a               b

    "weather
   forcasting"

c                  d

e

f

Fig. 1: Overall design of the LiveIdeaBench benchmark. a. Over 1,000 scientific keywords, representing diverse
domains, are used in prompts for the Idea LLMs, encouraging divergent thinking and the generation of novel scientific
ideas. b. Sampled Judge LLMs evaluate the generated ideas across three primary dimensions: originality, feasibility
and clarity, assigning numerical scores to each idea. c. The evaluation panel comprises the top 10 state-of-the-art
models selected from LiveBench, ensuring robust assessment through sampling and ensemble scoring. d. Fluency scores
are derived by analyzing the diversity and substantive differences among ideas generated from the same keyword (using
a randomly sampled judge), while originality, feasibility, and clarity metrics are combined for integrated evaluation.
e. Following Guilford's creativity theory, the evaluation methodology assesses five critical dimensions: originality,
feasibility, clarity, fluency, and flexibility, with flexibility computed as the 30th percentile of the averaged scores across
the other four dimensions. f. The LiveIdeaBench benchmark provides a comprehensive dataset of generated ideas,
evaluation metrics, and a dynamic leaderboard tracking the performance of over 40 models.

                                                                2
varying findings suggest that the development of idea generation capabilities might be underpinned
by different cognitive mechanisms than general intelligence, a pattern potentially relevant to LLM
development as well. It's also noteworthy that the threshold debate has nuances regarding potential
versus achievement; some research suggests that while a threshold might (or might not) apply to
divergent thinking ability, intelligence may remain related [9, 13] or even become more important
for translating potential into real-world creative achievements across the entire range [14, 15]. These
early studies primarily focused on the relationship between general cognitive abilities and creative
potential, often measured via divergent thinking tasks. While much of this debate centers on general
creativity, the specific relationship between intelligence and scientific creativity, which heavily
relies on deep domain knowledge and rigorous methodology alongside ideation, remains an area
requiring nuanced investigation, though the general finding of creativity and intelligence being
distinct capabilities provides a useful starting point for examining LLMs.

    Another theoretical strand addresses creativity assessment methodologies. Guilford's influential
theoretical framework [8, 17] introduced the distinction between divergent thinking (generating varied
responses to open-ended prompts) and convergent thinking (finding optimal solutions to well-defined
problems). Guilford identified four key aspects of divergent thinking: the ability to generate a large
number of ideas (fluency), the capacity to think across different categories (flexibility), the generation
of novel ideas (originality), and the development of detailed and refined ideas (elaboration). More
recent research by Cortes et al. [21] has noted that traditional creativity assessments typically
involve elements of both divergent and convergent thinking rather than isolating either process.
Their findings indicate that purportedly divergent and convergent tasks show limited correlation,
questioning whether they reflect different components of the same higher-level construct (creativity).
This work highlights the complexity of measuring creative processes and informs our approach to
evaluating idea generation in LLMs.

    Broader theoretical frameworks further enrich this picture. For instance, Margaret Boden [18]
distinguishes between psychological creativity (P-creativity, novel to the individual) and historical
creativity (H-creativity, novel to humanity), while Teresa Amabile's [19] componential theory
highlights the interplay of domain-relevant skills, creativity-relevant processes (including divergent
thinking), and intrinsic task motivation. Melvin Rhodes' [20] "4 P's" (Person, Process, Press,
Product) provide a holistic view, reminding us that creativity involves the individual creator, the
cognitive processes, the environmental influences, and the resulting outcome. While our approach
primarily assesses aspects of the creative "process" (specifically idea generation fluency and diversity
under minimal constraints), understanding these broader theories helps contextualize its scope and
limitations within the larger landscape of scientific creativity, which ultimately demands valuable
and impactful products.

    These theoretical frameworks from human creativity research have informed modern approaches
to evaluating LLMs' idea generation capabilities. Contemporary creativity research has expanded
assessment methodologies beyond traditional paper-based tests, with Rafner et al. [22] developing
CREA, a comprehensive game-based tool for measuring divergent and convergent thinking. Their
validation studies across diverse populations have demonstrated the effectiveness of these novel
assessment approaches. Benedek's [15] recent work clarifies that creative potential (measured through
divergent thinking tasks) explains only limited variance in creative achievement, emphasizing complex
interactions between potential, behavior, and environmental factors.

    Recent research has systematically explored LLMs' potential for tasks analogous to human
creative processes through various methodological approaches. Rafner et al. [5] provided a critical
analysis of creativity in the age of generative AI, noting that while these systems now perform com-
parably to humans on some creativity tests, important qualitative differences remain. Their analysis
emphasized the importance of integrating psychological science with computational approaches to

                                                                3
develop more effective creativity support tools, highlighting both the promising capabilities and
important limitations of current systems. Empirical assessments in creative contexts have shown
promising results, exploring LLMs' potential through various applications. For instance, Meincke
et al. [37] focused on product ideation, comparing the quality and novelty of ideas generated by
GPT-4 against those generated by humans. Comprehensive human evaluation studies [38] have
compared LLM-generated research proposals with those from NLP researchers, revealing statistically
significant advantages in novelty while maintaining comparable feasibility metrics. Complementing
these approaches, Lee et al. [39] conducted an empirical study investigating the impact of using
ChatGPT on human creative performance, finding that it significantly enhanced the articulation

a  b

   c

Fig. 2: Performance comparison of models evaluated on LiveIdeaBench. a. Dimensional scores (originality,
feasibility, fluency, clarity, and flexibility) and overall performance (red line, with 95% confidence intervals, n " 6987)
for open-weight and proprietary models. The central line of box represents the median, the box spans the 25th to 75th
percentiles, the whiskers extend to the minimum and maximum values within 1.5 times the interquartile range. b.
Multidimensional performance profiles of representative models across the five evaluation dimensions. c. Word cloud
visualization of scientific keywords. For detailed scores and 95% CIs for each model, see Supplementary Table S.3.

                                                                4
and creativity of human-generated ideas.
    Studies directly examining divergent thinking abilities in LLMs have employed various method-

ological approaches. Cropley [40] analyzed ChatGPT on the Divergent Association Task and found
that while GPT-4 demonstrated strong semantic distance capabilities in generating unrelated words,
its inconsistency and predictability highlighted important differences from human creative processes.
This research emphasized the distinction between divergent thinking abilities and true creativity,
suggesting the importance of understanding both the capabilities and limitations of these systems.
Marrone, Cropley, and Medeiros [41] further examined how narrow AI impacts human creativity,
identifying both supportive functions and important limitations in creative processes. However,
Wenger and Kenett [42] found that while LLMs performed on par with humans in individual
creativity tests, they exhibited significantly lower response diversity at the group level, showing high
homogeneity in creative outputs even across different model families. This creative homogeneity
represents an important limitation in current systems. Confirming this potential downside, Doshi et
al. [43], in an experimental study on story writing, found that while access to generative AI ideas
caused stories to be evaluated as more creative individually (especially for less creative writers),
these AI-enabled stories were significantly more similar to each other than stories produced by
humans alone, pointing to a potential reduction in collective novelty. These findings collectively
underscore the importance of evaluating not just the quality but also the diversity and novelty of
AI-generated creative content.

    The assessment methodology for LLM creativity has evolved through several sophisticated
frameworks designed for broad evaluation. For instance, Lu et al. [44] evaluated text-to-code
creativity using programming challenges combined with prompting strategies designed to force novel
solutions by restricting previously used techniques, though potential reliance on static problem sets
raises limitations. Building upon foundational creativity theories [8], Zhao et al. [45] proposed
a comprehensive, albeit static, framework adapting established psychological test tasks to assess
general creativity across multiple dimensions. These frameworks offer valuable, comprehensive
assessments for their respective areas, often incorporating both divergent and convergent aspects or
multiple task types with richer contextual inputs.

    In the context of reasoning mechanics, Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting has emerged as a
powerful technique for enhancing LLMs' reasoning capabilities. Following the initial introduction
of CoT prompting [23], several advanced variants have been developed [24, 25], enabling models
to explore multiple reasoning paths simultaneously. Recent investigations into programming
applications [26] have demonstrated that incorporating brainstorming significantly improves LLMs'
performance. A common thread among these approaches is their implicit reliance on divergent
thinking - the ability to generate multiple distinct solutions or paths from a single starting point.

    Furthermore, recent years have seen significant advances in automated scientific systems aimed
at aiding or accelerating discovery, each offering unique approaches. The AI Scientist framework
[27] demonstrated potential for end-to-end research automation, while Nova [28] introduced iterative
planning mechanisms for idea development. Systems like ResearchAgent [29] and Scideator [30]
have further refined these approaches through knowledge graph integration. Pushing the boundaries
further, the recent AI co-scientist framework from Google [31] showcases a sophisticated multi-
agent system designed to generate novel research hypotheses and detailed research proposals. The
system employs specialized agents for generation, reflection, ranking, evolution, proximity analysis,
and meta-review to iteratively refine scientific hypotheses through a self-improving cycle, with
generated hypotheses later validated through real-world laboratory experiments conducted by human
researchers. Similarly, Wang and colleagues' [32] SCIMON system leverages literature retrieval and
iterative novelty enhancement to generate scientific ideas, while Gu and Krenn [33, 34] demonstrated
approaches using knowledge graphs and LLMs to suggest research directions. However, these

                                                                5
specialized systems typically rely heavily on extensive knowledge bases, complex contextual inputs,
or planning processes to generate and refine ideas or research plans. While highly effective for
their intended applications, this dependence on rich context and complex architectures makes it
challenging to isolate and evaluate their fundamental capabilities for initial idea generation from
minimal cues, particularly their capacity for divergent thinking. This limitation is particularly
evident in systems like SciPIP [35] and IdeaSynth [36], whose structure encourages integrating
existing information rather than generating diverse possibilities from minimal input.

    The challenges in evaluating creative output at scale necessitate automated assessment methods.
The emergence of LLMs as evaluation tools has opened new possibilities for assessing model outputs
at scale. Various evaluation approaches [46­51] have demonstrated the feasibility of using LLMs to
evaluate other models' responses, offering advantages in terms of efficiency and cost-effectiveness
compared to human evaluation [52]. Recent advances, such as the jury-based framework [54] and
reference-guided verdict method [53], have shown promising results in reducing individual model
biases and achieving high agreement with human judgments. The development of specialized
evaluation models like Prometheus 2 [55] further underscores the growing sophistication in this area.
However, most existing approaches focus on evaluating responses against predetermined criteria or
reference answers, making them better suited for convergent thinking tasks than divergent thinking
assessment. Second, the evaluation of scientific creativity presents unique challenges that go beyond
traditional metrics, requiring simultaneous assessment of originality, feasibility, clarity, fluency, and
flexibility.

    The landscape of artificial intelligence has undergone dramatic transformation since the emergence
of ChatGPT in late 2022, with LLMs demonstrating increasingly sophisticated capabilities in
scientific contexts. As we approach late 2024, these models have surpassed human expert baselines
on various standardized benchmarks across multiple dimensions, exemplified by AlphaGeometry
[6]. Yet, these advances in general intelligence prompt a fundamental question: does the potential
for scientific idea generation in LLMs grow in tandem with their analytical capabilities? This
question becomes particularly pertinent when evaluating LLMs' potential contributions to scientific
innovation. Current evaluation benchmarks predominantly rely on rich contextual inputs, such as
research paper titles, abstracts, or complete articles. While these approaches effectively assess models'
ability to comprehend and synthesize existing knowledge, they are not designed to systematically
evaluate a crucial aspect of scientific thinking - the capacity to generate novel ideas from limited
information. This limitation is particularly significant, as many groundbreaking scientific discoveries
originate from unexpected connections and conceptual leaps [2].

    In this work, we introduce LiveIdeaBench (Fig. 1), a novel evaluation benchmark designed
to assess LLMs' capabilities in divergent thinking for scientific idea generation under constrained
conditions. Unlike existing benchmarks that predominantly evaluate convergent thinking by requiring
models to derive single correct solutions from rich contextual information, LiveIdeaBench is explicitly
grounded in Guilford's seminal theory of divergent production [8]. Our methodology operationalizes
key principles from this framework: we use single-keyword prompts as minimal context. This
constraint encourages models to generate connections and concepts primarily from their internal
knowledge representations, rather than synthesizing readily available information from detailed
prompts (e.g., abstracts, or complete articles), thus probing their capacity for less scaffolded, more
internally-driven ideation relevant to initial brainstorming. This approach is analogous to the broad
stimuli used in classic divergent thinking tasks (e.g., the "Utility Test" described by Guilford), to
elicit the generation of multiple and varied potential ideas, fostering a "ready flow of ideas" rather
than convergence towards a predefined outcome. This approach necessitates that models "produce
their own answers", a hallmark of divergent production assessment distinct from selection-based or
highly constrained convergent thinking tasks.

                                                                6
                     HIITWIIOV r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
       GPEYHIWSRRIXXLMROMRK r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

               GPEYHIWSRRIX r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
                         U[UF r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

             KIQMRMJPEWLI\T r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
    KIQMRMJPEWLXLMROMRKI\T r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

        KIQMRMTVSI\T r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
                U[UFTVIZMI[ r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
               GPEYHIWSRRIX r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
                    QMWXVEPWQEPP r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
                   KIQMRMTVS r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

    HIITWIIOVHMWXMPPU[IRF r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
                  KTXTVIZMI[ r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

               QMWXVEPPEVKI r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
                             TLM r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

    HIITWIIOVHMWXMPPPPEQEF r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
                   HIITWIIOGLEX r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
                  KIQQEFMX r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

               KTXS r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
         KIQMRMJPEWLPMXI r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

                          SQMRM r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
           U[IRFMRWXVYGX r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
          U[IRHVEGEV]WF r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
          PPEQEFMRWXVYGX r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
           PPEQEFMRWXVYGX r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

                       U[IRQE\ r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
                               S r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

                      RSZETVSZ r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
     U[IRGSHIVFMRWXVYGX r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

                      KTXXYVFS r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
               WXITO r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

                     KVSO r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
             U[IRFMRWXVYGX r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

                          SQMRM r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
  QMWXVEPWQEPPFMRWXVYGX r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

                   GPEYHISTYW r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
                     SQMRMLMKL r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

      GPEYHILEMOY r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
                      KTXSQMRM r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r

           PPEQEFMRWXVYGX r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
                      RSZEPMXIZ r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r
                          4L7]]WWMXGIWQ&WMSIPSRKK]MRII)VEMRVXKLWGMIR4GLIEVQE G]*MRE%RGGGISY%RRXXMLRVKSTSPS'KL]IQMW%X(WV]XEVXSERISRQK4]MSRPIMXIMGVMER7PK]WWGXMIIQRGWIWGM%IKR4VGMGIIYHPEXKYSVEKP]WGMIRG1IIH(MGEMXREIWGMIRG7IXEXMW4XMWG]1WGELXSLPISQ7KS]EGXMMSGWPSEKR]H0S)KGMSGRSQMGW
                                                                                 7GMIRXMJMG'EXIKSVMIWWSVXIHF]OI][SVHGSYRX

Fig. 3: Model Performance on LiveIdeaBench Across Scientific Categories. The heatmap displays average
performance scores with 95% confidence intervals for model-discipline combinations. Scientific categories were classified
using SciBERT [82] through semantic similarity computation following the framework from [83]. Higher scores (pink)
indicate better idea generation ability within each discipline. Numbers in parentheses following each scientific category
indicate the keyword count associated with that discipline. Categories are sorted by keyword count.

                                                                7
    By employing a specialized multi-model jury system, our evaluation directly measures core
divergent production dimensions like fluency (quantity and diversity of ideas, reflecting the capacity
to generate a "number of varied responses") and originality (novelty of ideas), as conceptualized
by Guilford, across 41 state-of-the-art models using over 1,000 scientific keywords from 22 distinct
domains. While acknowledging that comprehensive scientific creativity involves an interplay of
both divergent and convergent processes, LiveIdeaBench focuses on and evaluates the foundational,
generative phase: the ability to produce diverse scientific concepts from sparse cues. This capacity is
critical for sparking innovation but is often overlooked by conventional benchmarks. Thus, our focus
is on assessing this specific aspect of creative potential relevant to scientific discovery, rather than
evaluating the entire scientific process, which also involves deep domain expertise and subsequent
validation. We demonstrate that general intelligence metrics do not necessarily correlate with
capacity for scientific ideation; notably, models such as QwQ-32B-preview achieve performance
comparable to established systems like claude-3.7-sonnet:thinking despite significant gaps in general
benchmarks. We posit that such specialized evaluation serves as a crucial initial step towards
developing effective human-AI hybrid intelligence systems [56­58], providing the necessary insights
to leverage LLMs as collaborative tools for scientific discovery.

Results

    We assessed the performance of over 40 language models across multiple dimensions of scientific
ideation using our comprehensive evaluation benchmark. A detailed description of the generated idea
dataset is provided in Supplementary Note 2, and its constituent fields are listed in Supplementary
Table S.1. The evaluation results are visualized in Fig. 2. For detailed outcomes, including raw
scores and examples, please refer to Supplementary Table S.2; aggregated performance metrics and
model rankings are presented in Supplementary Table S.3.

Diverse Model Performance Across Scientific Domains Our quantitative assessment and
comparative analysis reveal distinct variations in model capabilities across scientific disciplines. (Fig.
3) While gemini-2.0-flash-thinking-exp, deepseek-r1, and claude-3.7-sonnet:thinking demonstrate
high overall scores, the pattern of their relative strengths exhibits domain specificity. Importantly,
although larger and more recent architectures generally achieve superior results, their advantage
is not uniform across disciplines, suggesting that domain expertise and reasoning capabilities
are not solely determined by model scale. For example, gemini-2.0-flash-thinking-exp excelled in
anthropology ideation; claude-3.7-sonnet:thinking performed best in chemistry, medicine, and data
science; while deepseek-r1 demonstrated stronger relative performance in physics.

Distinction between General Intelligence and Scientific Idea Generation The comparison
between LiveIdeaBench and LiveBench metrics (see Fig. 4 and Supplementary Fig. S.4) uncovers a
notable disconnect between general intelligence and scientific idea generation capabilities, revealing
contrasting results patterns across models. While claude-3.7-sonnet:thinking leads in general intelli-
gence (LiveBench) and also shows high effectiveness on scientific ideation (LiveIdeaBench), its idea
generation capabilities are matched by models like qwq-32b-preview (ranked 8/41 in LiveIdeaBench).
Notably, qwq-32b-preview exhibits low general intelligence scores, representing a profile of low
general intelligence but high scientific ideation capability. As Fig. 4 illustrates, other patterns exist,
such as high general intelligence paired with lower scientific ideation capability (e.g., o3-mini-high).
These contrasting profiles underscore that scientific idea generation capability, as measured by
LiveIdeaBench, is poorly predicted by general intelligence, necessitating specialized benchmarks like

                                                                8
LiveIdeaBench for evaluating this aspect of LLM potential. This statistically significant but weak
positive correlation (rp41q " 0.357, p " 0.038, r2 " 0.127, 95% CI " r0.022, 0.621s; see Supplemen-
tary Fig. S.4) suggests that fostering scientific idea generation capabilities in these systems may
benefit from distinct development approaches compared to enhancing general problem-solving skills.

Impact of Model Architecture and Training Strategies We observe that mistral-small, which
ranks near the bottom in general intelligence, demonstrates remarkably high scientific divergent
thinking capabilities. Even more interestingly, the earlier released mistral-small model scored
significantly higher in creativity than the newer same-size, same-family model mistral-small-24b-
instruct-2501. We also observe that models from the same family (for example, qwq-32b and
qwq-32b-preview) score similarly in creativity while differing dramatically in general intelligence.
These two pairs of examples strongly suggest that a model's divergent thinking and convergent
thinking abilities cannot reliably predict each other. This pattern holds true even when comparing
models from the same family with different parameter counts. Focusing on mistral-large-2411 and

High General Intelligence,  High General Intelligence,     Low General Intelligence,
High Science Creativity     Low Science Creativity         High Science Creativity

Fig. 4: Comparison of LiveIdeaBench (upper half, assessing scientific ideation) and LiveBench (lower

half, assessing general intelligence, denoted as LB) across various evaluation metrics for the same
set of models. The middle rows show contrasting trends between models in average performance. While claude-
3.7-sonnet:thinking achieves the highest average score on LiveBench, its performance on scientific ideation tasks
(LiveIdeaBench) is comparable to qwq-32b-preview, which ranks fourth from last on general intelligence metrics. The
arrows highlight three representative patterns: claude-3.7-sonnet:thinking (left) exemplifies high general intelligence
combined with high scientific ideation capability; o3-mini-high (middle) shows high general intelligence but low scientific
ideation capability; and qwq-32b-preview (right) demonstrates low general intelligence but high scientific ideation
capability. These contrasting patterns highlight that LLMs' scientific idea generation capability, as measured by
LiveIdeaBench, is distinct from their general intelligence capabilities (e.g., reasoning, coding, and math), underscoring
the necessity of LiveIdeaBench for evaluating scientific ideation potential.

                                                        9
mistral-small (Fig. 4), we see that mistral-small still slightly outperforms mistral-large-2411 in
scientific divergent thinking, despite the latter having 123 billion parameters, far exceeding the
former's 24 billion. This further suggests that parameter count alone does not appear to be the
primary determinant of scientific divergence capabilities, suggesting other factors like training data
or architectural nuances play significant roles.

Trade-offs in Scientific Originality and Feasibility The Pareto front visualization (see Fig.
5) illustrates clear trade-offs between feasibility and originality. While claude-3.7-sonnet:thinking
achieves the highest originality with moderate feasibility, nova-pro-v1 demonstrates the opposite
pattern. Models like deepseek-r1, qwq-32b, and gemini-2.0-flash-exp exhibit balanced effectiveness
between these two dimensions. Particularly, deepseek-r1 stands out for its exceptional all-round
capabilities across all measured dimensions of scientific idea generation, demonstrating that balanced
effectiveness is achievable despite common tendencies toward specialization. Additionally, while
models like claude-3.7-sonnet:thinking and several Gemini variants show strong fluency and flexibility,
the mediocre results of o3-mini-high, known for logical reasoning, highlight the specific nature of
the capabilities measured by this benchmark.

Independence of Idea Quality from Length As shown in Fig. 6, while the majority of
models generally adhered well to the 100-word limit specified in the prompt (Fig. 6b), their mean
originality, feasibility, and clarity scores demonstrated significant variations across different models
(Fig. 6a,c­e ). Further analysis of idea length (see Supplementary Figs. S.1 and S.2) reveals a
statistically significant but very weak positive correlation with idea quality (p286490q " 0.089, p 
0.0001, 2 " 0.008, 95% CI " r0.085, 0.093s). Even for models specifically designed for reasoning,
as detailed in Supplementary Note 8, the relationship between the length of their thoughts and the
generated idea quality remains very weak. This observation lends further support to the notion that
effective idea generation is not merely a function of extensive logical elaboration, distinguishing it
from certain aspects of general reasoning.

Discussion

     LiveIdeaBench represents a comprehensive benchmark specifically designed to evaluate LLMs'
divergent thinking capabilities in scientific innovation. Existing LLM benchmarks predominantly
focus on problem-solving tasks such as logical reasoning, mathematical computation, and code
generation. These benchmarks inherently assess convergent thinking­the ability to arrive at
predetermined correct answers through structured problem-solving (e.g., selecting the right option
in multiple choice questions, completing text with expected words, or fixing code to match specific
requirements). This stands in contrast to divergent thinking, which involves generating diverse,
novel solutions from minimal contextual input.

     Furthermore, our benchmark incorporates mechanisms to address potential data contamination
and overfitting issues that commonly plague static benchmarks. Traditional evaluation methods may
encourage models to perform well on specific test cases without developing generalizable creative
thinking abilities. Our approach employs a dynamic judge panel comprising multiple state-of-the-
art models, randomly sampling multiple LLMs for evaluation and employing ensemble scoring
methods. This design not only minimizes individual model biases but also leverages the continually
updated knowledge bases of judge models, effectively preventing the limitations associated with
fixed benchmarks. This methodology aligns with recent advances in live benchmarking [59, 60],

                                                               10
which similarly address data contamination and overfitting concerns through dynamic evaluation
mechanisms.

    Our analysis through LiveIdeaBench yields several notable insights into LLMs' scientific idea
generation capabilities. Most notably, we find that a model's performance on these divergent
thinking tasks is not strongly coupled with its performance on general intelligence benchmarks.
This suggests that fostering scientific idea generation capabilities in these systems may benefit from
distinct development approaches compared to enhancing general problem-solving skills, such as
prioritizing training objectives that reward diverse conceptual associations rather than convergent

                           0MZI-HIE&IRGL1SHIP4IVJSVQERGI4EVIXS*VSRX

                                                                                                                               
    

                                                                                                                               
    

                                    

    *PYIRG]

    
3VMKMREPMX]                         
                                                                                                                                  *PI\MFMPMX]
    

                                    

    'PEVMX]

                                    

    

                                    

                                  

                 *IEWMFMPMX]

Fig. 5: Pareto front visualization of model performance on LiveIdeaBench. This illustrates the trade-
off between feasibility and originality across different language models, with bubble size, color gradient and edge
width representing fluency, flexibility and clarity scores, respectively. The distribution reveals a clear Pareto
frontier, where claude-3.7-sonnet:thinking achieves the highest originality but moderate feasibility, while nova-pro-v1
demonstrates the opposite pattern. Models such as deepseek-r1, qwq-32b, and gemini-2.0-flash-exp exhibit relatively
balanced performance between these two dimensions. In terms of fluency and flexibility, claude-3.7-sonnet, claude-3.7-
sonnet:thinking, gemini-2.0-flash-exp, gemini-2.0-pro-exp-02-05 and gemini-2.0-flash-thinking-exp show particularly
strong performance. Notably, deepseek-r1 stands out for its exceptional all-round performance across all dimensions of
scientific idea generation, suggesting strong performance across the dimensions measured by this benchmark. Moreover,
while the o3-mini-high is renowned for its proficiency in logical and mathematical reasoning, it delivered a mediocre
performance on this benchmark. For detailed scores and 95% CIs for each model, see Supplementary Table S.3.

                   11
accuracy. These insights are particularly vital for constructing hybrid human-AI frameworks, where
specialized models can be tailored to augment specific stages of the human creative process. The
varying strengths we observe across different model architectures, particularly in originality versus
feasibility trade-offs, point to potential complementarity in scientific applications.

    These findings, particularly the distinct performance profiles where some models excel in ideation
despite lower general intelligence, indicate that LLMs' divergent thinking capabilities operate largely
independently from the convergent thinking abilities typically measured by problem-solving tasks.
We believe this phenomenon is closely tied to variations in the relevance of pre-training data
to scientific tasks, differences in post-training methodologies applied, and inherent architectural
properties, rather than being determined by model scale alone. This observed difference between
metrics underscores the importance of specialized evaluation benchmarks like LiveIdeaBench that
specifically target these idea generation capabilities, rather than attempting to infer them from
general intelligence assessments.

    However, several limitations warrant consideration. The use of contemporary state-of-the-
art models as judges makes temporal comparisons difficult. When the judge panel composition
changes with model updates, direct performance comparisons across different evaluation periods
become unreliable. While this limitation mirrors challenges faced by other dynamic benchmarks like
LiveBench, it limits our ability to track longitudinal trends in model capabilities. Furthermore, our
evaluation includes several proprietary, closed-source models (e.g., GPT-4o). Access to these models
is typically via APIs which may be subject to change, and the underlying models can be updated
without public notice, potentially impacting exact reproducibility. While including these models is
essential for a comprehensive assessment of the current state-of-the-art, we acknowledge this inherent
limitation regarding reproducibility compared to evaluations focused solely on open-weight models.
Moreover, the LLM-as-a-judge approach itself introduces a potential source of bias. Aligned models
can exhibit sycophancy [61­63], a tendency to agree with the user or produce agreeable outputs,
which may lead to inflated absolute scores and a compressed score range, further reinforcing the
need to focus on relative rather than absolute performance rankings. Additionally, we observe an
inherent tension between models' safety constraints and creative evaluation. Some models exemplify
this behavior by declining to generate ideas for potentially sensitive keywords (e.g., "ecotoxicology").
While such safety measures are crucial, they can negatively impact creativity scores, potentially
undervaluing models with stronger ethical constraints. The potential for hallucinations in the
generated ideas themselves [64] also underscores the necessity of human oversight in practical
applications.

    Furthermore, we recognize a fundamental challenge in the reliability of LLM-as-a-Judge ap-
proaches. When evaluating scientific ideas containing concepts outside the judge models' knowledge
boundaries, these models might misunderstand novel concepts and consequently misjudge their
originality or feasibility. While our use of a dynamic panel of state-of-the-art judge models likely
provides broader and more current knowledge coverage than static panels, this fundamental lim-
itation persists. While our multi-model ensemble approach mitigates this issue to some extent,
more comprehensive solutions could involve retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) approaches that
incorporate up-to-date scientific literature. By augmenting LLM judges with the ability to retrieve
and reference the latest scientific papers, such approaches could significantly enhance evaluation
accuracy, particularly for highly specialized or cutting-edge scientific domains, although implement-
ing effective RAG systems for this purpose presents its own challenges regarding retrieval relevance
and integration with the judging process. This represents a promising direction for future work
that could further strengthen the reliability of LLM-based creativity assessments. To empirically
assess this reliability, we conducted a human expert validation focused on the Partial Differential
Equations (PDE) domain (see Supplementary Note 7). The results showed encouraging alignment

                                                               12
   a     b

c     d     e

Fig. 6: Comprehensive Analysis of Idea Quality, Length, and Component Scores. a. Mean composite idea
scores (average of Originality, Feasibility, and Clarity) with 95% confidence intervals for different language models.
b. Mean idea length in words across models with specific word counts labeled. c­e. Detailed breakdown of average
performance on individual dimensions: Originality (c), Feasibility (d), and Clarity (e) scores with 95% confidence
intervals. (n " 6987) For the regression plot between clarity scores and originality, feasibility scores across all generated
ideas, see Supplementary Fig. S.5.

between human experts and LLM judgments, particularly for originality, lending empirical support
to the LLM-as-a-judge approach, at least within this specific domain.

    Looking ahead, several research directions emerge. To address temporal comparability issues,
normalized scoring mechanisms could maintain meaningful cross-temporal comparisons while pre-
serving the advantages of dynamic evaluation. The comprehensive dataset generated through our
evaluations offers opportunities for training scientific language models, mining ideation patterns, and
investigating novel scientific ideas. Future work must also tackle the challenge of fairly evaluating
creative potential while accounting for ethical constraints, possibly through domain-specific scoring
adjustments or separate evaluation tracks for models with different safety priorities.

    The implications of our findings extend beyond model evaluation to the broader landscape of

                                                               13
AI-assisted scientific discovery. As LLMs demonstrate increasingly sophisticated idea generation
capabilities, they hold promise as powerful tools for accelerating scientific innovation - from hypothesis
generation to experimental design [65, 66]. Our benchmark provides a foundation for understanding
and improving these capabilities, potentially enabling more effective human-AI collaboration [56­58]
and informing the design of human-aware AI systems for science [67] by leveraging specific model
profiles to complement human cognitive blind spots in pushing the boundaries of scientific knowledge.
The creative strengths we observed in different model architectures suggest that a diverse ecosystem
of AI tools, each with complementary capabilities, could support different aspects of the scientific
process, for instance, by pairing high-originality models for initial hypothesis generation with
high-feasibility models for experimental implementation.

    These findings and challenges point toward a broader research agenda: understanding how to
nurture and evaluate machine creativity while maintaining essential safety guardrails, ultimately
in service of advancing scientific discovery. Through continued refinement, LiveIdeaBench aims to
serve as a key tool in this evolving landscape of AI capability assessment and scientific innovation.

    Finally, a practical consideration is the environmental cost associated with the extensive LLM
usage required for comprehensive benchmarking [68]. Using the EcoLogits Calculator [69] to estimate
the carbon footprint of our benchmark evaluations, we calculate a total emission of approximately
3074 kgCO2eq for the full evaluation run reported here. While necessary for rigorous assessment,
this highlights the significant energy demands of current AI systems. A detailed breakdown of the
estimated emissions per model and per role (idea generator vs. judge) can be found in Supplementary
Table S.4.

Methods

    Building upon Guilford's foundational theory of divergent thinking, we develop a comprehensive
evaluation methodology (see Fig. 1) that quantitatively assesses five fundamental dimensions
in scientific idea generation. While Guilford's original theoretical framework provides theoretical
underpinnings, we extend and operationalize these concepts specifically for evaluating LLMs' scientific
idea generation capabilities within our LiveIdeaBench benchmark. It is important to note that
our methodology evaluates an essential but not exhaustive aspect of scientific creativity, focusing
primarily on divergent thinking capabilities.

    The human expert validation process in this study was conducted in full accordance with relevant
ethical regulations and was approved by the Scientific and Ethic Committee of Renmin University
of China (Approval ID: L20250110). All experts provided written informed consent on a voluntary
basis without compensation. The study design does not involve sex or gender variables.

Dimensions of Evaluation

Originality Originality assessment focuses on the uniqueness and novelty of generated ideas.
We implement this through our critic system, where judge LLMs evaluate each idea's originality
independently (see Fig. 1b and Supplementary Note 1.2). The final originality score for each model
is computed as the mean evaluation across all scientific keywords and generated ideas, providing an
absolute score that reflects the model's capacity for novel ideation. To ensure assessment reliability,
each generated idea is evaluated by a minimum of three randomly assigned critic LLMs from
our panel. This multiple-evaluator approach mitigates potential assessment bias that could arise
from relying on a single model's judgment, thereby enhancing the objectivity and reliability of our
evaluation benchmark.

                                                               14
Feasibility In the context of scientific innovation, the practical implementability and scientific
soundness of an idea are paramount. Therefore, our evaluation includes a distinct feasibility
dimension, assessing whether a proposed idea is technically achievable and aligns with established
scientific principles and constraints. This aligns with the instructions given to the LLMs, which
noted feasibility as a key characteristic of a good scientific idea (see Supplementary Note 1.1).
Similar to originality and clarity, feasibility scores are determined by our critic system and averaged
across all keywords and ideas to produce an absolute metric (see Supplementary Note 1.2). This
ensures our benchmark evaluates the practical viability crucial for scientific progress.

Clarity Our evaluation benchmark incorporates a clarity dimension, directly informed by the
prompt provided to the idea-generating LLMs, which notes that good scientific ideas should be
clearly articulated (see Supplementary Note 1.1). This dimension assesses the quality of the idea's
expression, focusing on its coherence, logical flow, and comprehensibility, particularly given the
constraint of the 100-word limit which demands concise articulation. While conceptually related
to the elaboration aspect in Guilford's creativity theory, our assessment prioritizes effective and
understandable communication within the specified format. Like originality and feasibility, clarity
scores are determined by our critic system (see Fig. 1b and Supplementary Note 1.2), involving
multiple judges per idea and averaging the results. Assessing clarity acknowledges that the potential
impact of a scientific idea depends not only on its novelty and feasibility but also on how effectively
it is communicated [39].

Fluency Fluency assessment examines the model's capacity to generate diverse, non-redundant
ideas using identical keywords (see Fig. 1d). Through our judge panel, we evaluate the distinctiveness
of generated outputs using a letter-grade scoring system: D indicates academically identical ideas;
C represents similar ideas addressing similar problems; B denotes different ideas addressing similar
problems; and A signifies completely different ideas addressing different problems. To align with
the 1-10 integer scale used for all evaluation dimensions, these four qualitative grades are mapped
linearly to the integer scores 1 (for D), 4 (for C), 7 (for B), and 10 (for A), respectively. This
mapping ensures consistent scaling across dimensions and maintains equal intervals between the
assessed qualitative distinctness levels, enabling precise measurement of genuine idea diversity
versus surface-level variations (see Supplementary Note 1.3 for prompts). While simpler diversity
metrics examining syntax or semantics would require fewer computational resources, we chose
LLM-as-a-Judge for its ability to better capture the nuanced differences between genuinely distinct
scientific ideas versus superficial variations. For a benchmark specifically designed to evaluate
scientific divergent thinking capabilities, this precision is essential.

Flexibility Flexibility measurement evaluates the model's ability to maintain consistent per-
formance across different scientific domains and contexts. Rather than treating flexibility as an
independent metric, we derive it from the distribution of the combined scores (averaging originality,
feasibility, clarity, and fluency) across various keywords. Following the principle that a system's
overall effectiveness is constrained by its weakest performing components, we focus on the 30th
percentile of this composite score distribution (see Fig. 1e). This percentile choice provides a
robust measure of a model's performance floor while avoiding extreme outliers, enabling us to assess
whether its scientific creativity can genuinely generalize to less common or niche domains. The
resulting metric identifies models that maintain reliable performance across diverse scientific contexts
rather than those exhibiting domain-specific excellence, thus providing a conservative estimate of
cross-domain capabilities.

                                                               15
Scientific Keyword Selection

     The keywords set comprises 1,180 high-impact scientific keywords (Fig. 2c) across 22 distinct
scientific disciplines, selected based on current search engine engagement metrics. Unlike static
benchmarks, LiveIdeaBench updates its keyword database monthly to maintain alignment with
emerging scientific trends and research frontiers. This automated refresh mechanism ensures the
benchmark consistently reflects contemporary scientific discourse and technological advancement,
making it particularly valuable for evaluating LLMs' ability to engage with cutting-edge scientific
concepts rather than just established knowledge.

Model Selection

     LiveIdeaBench maintains a continuously evolving roster of evaluated models by automatically
incorporating the top 41 performers from the most recent LiveBench evaluations [59]. This dynamic
selection process ensures our benchmark always tests the latest advancements in language model
capabilities. We implement a dual-role system where all models serve as idea generators, while
the top 10 performers additionally function as our judge panel (critics), subject to the diversity
constraints outlined in the Experimental Protocol. This approach creates a self-updating evaluation
benchmark that evolves alongside rapid developments in AI, ensuring that both idea generation and
assessment standards reflect current state-of-the-art capabilities. The automatic monthly refresh of
both models and evaluation criteria through LiveBench integration helps prevent benchmark staleness
and potential gaming of the system, maintaining LiveIdeaBench's relevance as a contemporary
measure of scientific creativity.

     Our evaluation benchmark currently encompasses 41 state-of-the-art LLMs based on LiveBench's
March 2025 results. This includes models from major developers such as Anthropic (claude-3.7-
sonnet:thinking, claude-3.7-sonnet, claude-3.5-sonnet, claude-3-opus, claude-3.5-haiku-20241022)
[70]; OpenAI (o3-mini-high, gpt-4.5-preview, o1, o3-mini, o1-mini, gpt-4o-2024-11-20, gpt-4-turbo,
gpt-4o-mini) [71]; Google (gemini-2.0-flash-thinking-exp, gemini-2.0-pro-exp-02-05, gemini-2.0-flash-
exp, gemini-pro-1.5, gemini-2.0-flash-lite-001, gemma-2-27b-it) [72]; Qwen (qwq-32b, qwen-max,
qwen2.5-dracarys2-72b, qwen-2.5-72b-instruct, qwen-2.5-coder-32b-instruct, qwq-32b-preview, qwen-
2.5-7b-instruct) [73, 74]; DeepSeek (deepseek-r1, deepseek-chat (v3), deepseek-r1-distill-llama-70b,
deepseek-r1-distill-qwen-32b) [75­77]; Meta (llama-3.1-405b-instruct, llama-3.3-70b-instruct, llama-
3.1-70b-instruct) [78]; Mistral (mistral-large-2411, mistral-small-24b-instruct-2501, mistral-small
(v2409)) [79]; Amazon (nova-pro-v1, nova-lite-v1) [80]; StepFun (step-2-16k-202411); xAI (grok-2-
1212); and Microsoft (phi-4) [81]. This comprehensive set includes both proprietary and open-weight
models, spanning diverse architectures, parameter scales, and training methodologies.

Experimental Protocol

     We implemented several methodological controls to ensure rigorous evaluation:

Model Selection Criteria for Idea Generation To prevent redundancy in the pool of idea-
generating models, we selected only the most recent version of models with multiple temporal
variants (e.g., GPT-4o series). Models exhibiting API instability during the evaluation period were
also excluded to maintain data quality consistency across all evaluated models.

Judge LLM Panel Formation, Independence, and Application The judge panel, comprising
the top 10 models from LiveBench, is formed while applying specific diversity constraints to mitigate
potential correlated biases. To ensure broader representation, we limit the contribution from

                                                               16
any single organization to a maximum of 20% (i.e., 2 models) of the panel; if the initial top 10
includes more than two models from one organization, the lower-ranked ones are replaced by the
next highest-ranked eligible models from different organizations. Additionally, when considering
model pairs with identical base models that differ primarily in "reasoning effort" (e.g., o3-mini vs.
o3-mini-high), we select only one representative for the judge panel (prioritizing the variant with
higher general intelligence scores on LiveBench) to avoid redundancy and the potential amplification
of biases inherent to that specific base model. Furthermore, to prevent circular dependency during
evaluation, we implement strict independence: when evaluating any specific model's generated
ideas, that model is explicitly excluded from serving on the judge panel for that evaluation round,
ensuring independent assessment free from self-evaluation. This established panel is then utilized
through specific sampling procedures for evaluation: For assessing originality, feasibility, and clarity,
each individual generated idea is evaluated by a subset of 3 judges randomly sampled from the
remaining eligible panel members. The final score for each of these dimensions is the average of
the scores provided by these three judges, enhancing assessment robustness. For assessing fluency,
which evaluates the diversity of ideas generated for the same keyword by a given model, the
comparison is performed by a single judge randomly sampled from the eligible panel members for
each keyword-model pair.

Response Standardization All models were prompted to generate ideas within a 100-word
target length, with a maximum allowable threshold of 200 words (see Supplementary Note 1.1).
Responses exceeding this limit were excluded from analysis to ensure comparative validity across
models.

Special Implementations The reasoning-centric architecture of qwq-32b-preview necessitated a
modified protocol, incorporating a "°°Final Idea:°°" delimiter for response parsing (see Supplemen-
tary Note 1.4). In cases where parsing failed, critic LLMs evaluated the complete reasoning output
to maintain assessment comprehensiveness.

Handling Refused Responses To fairly assess models, especially those with strong safety
alignments that might refuse prompts for sensitive keywords, we implemented a two-step refusal
handling protocol. If an initial idea generation request is refused (detected via specific keywords
detailed in Supplementary Note 5), a fallback prompt reframing the task within an academic context
is used for a second attempt. This ensures models are not unduly penalized for safety constraints
when they might still be capable of generating relevant scientific ideas under appropriate framing.
Further details and refusal rates are provided in Supplementary Note 5.

Statistical Analysis

    Statistical correlations between evaluation metrics were assessed using either the Pearson
correlation coefficient prq or Spearman's rank correlation coefficient pq, depending on the normality
of the data distributions. Data normality was evaluated using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Pearson's
r was applied to normally distributed continuous variables (e.g., comparing LiveIdeaBench and
LiveBench scores), while Spearman's  was utilized for non-normally distributed data (e.g., analyzing
the relationship between idea length and quality scores). Detailed mathematical definitions and
formulations for these statistical metrics are provided in Supplementary Note 9.

                                                               17
Data availability

    The data generated in this study have been deposited in Huggingface at https://huggingface.
co/datasets/6cf/liveideabench-v2 (also see the Zenodo repository at https://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.17707879).

Code availability

    All the source codes used to reproduce the results in this study are available on GitHub
at https://github.com/x66ccff/liveideabench. (also see the Zenodo repository at https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17707647)

References

 [1] Wang, H. et al. Scientific discovery in the age of artificial intelligence. Nature 620, 47­60
      (2023).

 [2] Shi, F. & Evans, J. Surprising combinations of research contents and contexts are related to
      impact and emerge with scientific outsiders from distant disciplines. Nature Communications
      14, 1641 (2023).

 [3] AI4Science, M. R. & Quantum, M. A. The impact of large language models on scientific
      discovery: a preliminary study using GPT-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07361 (2023).

 [4] Krenn, M. et al. Forecasting the future of artificial intelligence with machine learning-based
      link prediction in an exponentially growing knowledge network. Nature Machine Intelligence 5,
      1326­1335 (2023).

 [5] Rafner, J., Beaty, R. E., Kaufman, J. C., Lubart, T. & Sherson, J. Creativity in the age of
      generative AI. Nature Human Behaviour 7, 1836­1838 (2023).

 [6] Trinh, T. H., Wu, Y., Le, Q. V., He, H. & Luong, T. Solving olympiad geometry without
      human demonstrations. Nature 625, 476­482 (2024).

 [7] Getzels, J. W. & Jackson, P. W. Creativity and Intelligence: Exploration with Gifted Students
      (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1962).

 [8] Guilford, J. P. The nature of human intelligence (McGraw-Hill, 1967).

 [9] Jauk, E., Benedek, M., Dunst, B. & Neubauer, A. C. The relationship between intelligence
      and creativity: New support for the threshold hypothesis by means of empirical breakpoint
      detection. Intelligence 41, 212­221 (2013). URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
      article/pii/S016028961300024X.

[10] Kim, K. H. Can only intelligent people be creative? A meta-analysis. Journal of Secondary
      Gifted Education 16, 57­66 (2005).

[11] Preckel, F., Holling, H. & Wiese, M. Relationship of intelligence and creativity in gifted and
      non-gifted students: An investigation of threshold theory. Personality and individual differences
      40, 159­170 (2006).

                                                               18
[12] Gralewski, J., Weremczuk, E. & Karwowski, M. Intelligence and creativity of polish middle-
      school students: Looking for the threshold hypothesis. The New Educational Review 29,
      328­338 (2012).

[13] Park, G., Lubinski, D. & Benbow, C. P. Ability differences among people who have commensu-
      rate degrees matter for scientific creativity. Psychological science 19, 957­961 (2008).

[14] Runco, M. A. & Albert, R. S. The threshold theory regarding creativity and intelligence:
      An empirical test with gifted and nongifted children. Creative Child and Adult Quarterly 11,
      212­218 (1986).

[15] Benedek, M. On the relationship between creative potential and creative achievement: Chal-
      lenges and future directions. Learning and Individual Differences 110, 102424 (2024).

[16] Weiss, S., Steger, D., Schroeders, U. & Wilhelm, O. A reappraisal of the threshold hypothesis
      of creativity and intelligence. Journal of Intelligence 8, 38 (2020).

[17] Guilford, J. P. Creativity. American Psychologist 5, 444­454 (1950).

[18] Boden, M. A. The creative mind: Myths and mechanisms (Routledge, 2004).

[19] Amabile, T. M. The social psychology of creativity: A componential conceptualization. Journal
     of Personality and Social Psychology, 45(2), 357 (1983).

[20] Rhodes, M. An analysis of creativity. The Phi Delta Kappan 42, 305­310 (1961).

[21] Cortes, R. A., Weinberger, A. B., Daker, R. J. & Green, A. E. Re-examining prominent measures
      of divergent and convergent creativity. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 27, 90­93
     (2019). URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352154618301694.
      Creativity.

[22] Rafner, J. et al. Towards game-based assessment of creative thinking. Creativity Research
      Journal, 35(4), 763­782 (2023).

[23] Wei, J. et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances
      in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 24824­24837 (2022).

[24] Kojima, T., Gu, S. S., Reid, M., Matsuo, Y. & Iwasawa, Y. Large language models are
      zero-shot reasoners. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information
      Processing Systems (Red Hook, NY, USA, 2024).

[25] Yao, S. et al. Tree of thoughts: deliberate problem solving with large language models. In
      Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
     (Red Hook, NY, USA, 2024).

[26] Li, X.-Y., Xue, J.-T., Xie, Z. & Li, M. Think outside the code: Brainstorming boosts large
      language models in code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10679 (2023).

[27] Lu, C. et al. The AI Scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2408.06292 (2024).

[28] Hu, X. et al. Nova: An iterative planning and search approach to enhance novelty and diversity
      of LLM generated ideas. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.14255 (2024).

                                                               19
[29] Baek, J., Jauhar, S. K., Cucerzan, S. & Hwang, S. J. ResearchAgent: Iterative research idea
      generation over scientific literature with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07738
     (2024).

[30] Radensky, M. et al. Scideator: Human-LLM scientific idea generation grounded in research-
      paper facet recombination. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14634 (2024).

[31] Gottweis, J. et al. Towards an AI co-scientist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18864 (2025). URL
      https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.18864. 2502.18864.

[32] Wang, Q., Downey, D., Ji, H. & Hope, T. Scimon: Scientific inspiration machines optimized
      for novelty. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
      Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 279­299 (2024).

[33] Gu, X. & Krenn, M. Interesting scientific idea generation using knowledge graphs and LLMs:
      Evaluations with 100 research group leaders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17044 (2024).

[34] Gu, X. & Krenn, M. Forecasting high-impact research topics via machine learning on evolving
      knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08640 (2024).

[35] Wang, W. et al. SciPIP: An LLM-based scientific paper idea proposer. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2410.23166 (2024).

[36] Pu, K. et al. IdeaSynth: Iterative research idea development through evolving and composing
      idea facets with literature-grounded feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04025 (2024).

[37] Meincke, L., Girotra, K., Nave, G., Terwiesch, C. & Ulrich, K. T. Using large language models
      for idea generation in innovation. The Wharton School Research Paper Forthcoming (2024).
      URL https://ssrn.com/abstract=4526071. 4526071.

[38] Si, C., Yang, D. & Hashimoto, T. Can LLMs generate novel research ideas? a large-scale
      human study with 100+ NLP researchers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.04109 (2024). URL
      https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.04109. 2409.04109.

[39] Lee, B. C. & Chung, J. An empirical investigation of the impact of ChatGPT on creativity.
      Nature Human Behaviour 8, 1906­1914 (2024).

[40] Cropley, D. Is artificial intelligence more creative than humans?: ChatGPT and the divergent
      association task. Learning Letters 2, 13­13 (2023).

[41] Marrone, R., Cropley, D. & Medeiros, K. How does narrow AI impact human creativity?
     Creativity Research Journal 1­11 (2024).

[42] Wenger, E. & Kenett, Y. We're different, we're the same: Creative homogeneity across LLMs.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.19361 (2025).

[43] Doshi, A. R. & Hauser, O. P. Generative AI enhances individual creativity but reduces
      the collective diversity of novel content. Science Advances 10 (2023). URL https://api.
      semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:271119565.

[44] Lu, Y., Wang, D., Li, T., Jiang, D. & Khashabi, D. Benchmarking language model creativity:
      A case study on code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.09007 (2024).

                                                               20
[45] Zhao, Y. et al. Assessing and understanding creativity in large language models. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2401.12491 (2024).

[46] Dubois, Y., Galambosi, B., Liang, P. & Hashimoto, T. B. Length-controlled AlpacaEval: A
      simple way to debias automatic evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04475 (2024).

[47] Zheng, L. et al. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena. Advances in
      Neural Information Processing Systems 36, 46595­46623 (2023).

[48] Li, T. et al. From crowdsourced data to high-quality benchmarks: Arena-Hard and BenchBuilder
      pipeline. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11939 (2024).

[49] Chiang, C.-H. & Lee, H.-y. Can large language models be an alternative to human evaluations?
      In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
     (Volume 1: Long Papers), 15607­15631 (Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto,
      Canada, 2023). URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.870.

[50] Chen, Y., Wang, R., Jiang, H., Shi, S. & Xu, R. Exploring the use of large language models
      for reference-free text quality evaluation: An empirical study. In Park, J. C. et al. (eds.)
      Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: IJCNLP-AACL 2023 (Findings),
      361­374 (Association for Computational Linguistics, Nusa Dua, Bali, 2023). URL https:
      //aclanthology.org/2023.findings-ijcnlp.32/.

[51] Huang, F., Kwak, H., Park, K. & An, J. ChatGPT rates natural language explanation
      quality like humans: But on which scales? In Calzolari, N. et al. (eds.) Proceedings of the
      2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and
      Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), 3111­3132 (ELRA and ICCL, Torino, Italia, 2024). URL
      https://aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.277/.

[52] Gilardi, F., Alizadeh, M. & Kubli, M. ChatGPT outperforms crowd workers for text-annotation
      tasks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120, e2305016120 (2023).

[53] Badshah, S. & Sajjad, H. Reference-Guided Verdict: LLMs-as-Judges in Automatic Evaluation
      of Free-Form Text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.09235 (2024).

[54] Verga, P. et al. Replacing judges with juries: Evaluating LLM generations with a panel of
      diverse models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18796 (2024).

[55] Kim, S. et al. Prometheus 2: An open source language model specialized in evaluating other
      language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01535 (2024).

[56] Rafner, J. et al. Mapping citizen science through the lens of human-centered AI. Human
     Computation 9, 66­95 (2022).

[57] Akata, Z. et al. A research agenda for hybrid intelligence: augmenting human intellect with
      collaborative, adaptive, responsible, and explainable artificial intelligence. Computer 53, 18­28
     (2020).

[58] Dellermann, D., Ebel, P., Söllner, M. & Leimeister, J. M. Hybrid intelligence. Business &
      Information Systems Engineering 61, 637­643 (2019).

[59] White, C. et al. LiveBench: A challenging, contamination-limited LLM benchmark. In
     The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (2025). URL https:
      //openreview.net/forum?id=sKYHBTAxVa.

                                                               21
[60] Jain, N. et al. LiveCodeBench: Holistic and contamination free evaluation of large language
      models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07974 (2024).

[61] Wei, J., Huang, D., Lu, Y., Zhou, D. & Le, Q. V. Simple synthetic data reduces sycophancy in
      large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03958 (2024). URL https://arxiv.org/
      abs/2308.03958. 2308.03958.

[62] Gu, J. et al. A survey on LLM-as-a-Judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15594 (2025). URL
      https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.15594. 2411.15594.

[63] Fanous, A. et al. SycEval: Evaluating LLM sycophancy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08177
     (2025). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.08177. 2502.08177.

[64] Huang, L. et al. A survey on hallucination in large language models: Principles, taxonomy,
      challenges, and open questions. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 43, 1­55 (2025).

[65] Falk, J. et al. How do hackathons foster creativity? towards ai collaborative evaluation of
      creativity at scale. In CHI'25: Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
     Computing Systems (Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), 2025).

[66] DiStefano, P. V. et al. Evaluating ai's ideas: The role of individual creativity and expertise in
      human-ai co-creativity (2025).

[67] Sourati, J. & Evans, J. A. Accelerating science with human-aware artificial intelligence. Nature
      Human Behaviour 7, 1682­1696 (2023).

[68] Lacoste, A., Luccioni, A., Schmidt, V. & Dandres, T. Quantifying the carbon emissions of
      machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09700 (2019).

[69] Rince, S. & Banse, A. EcoLogits: Evaluate the environmental impacts of generative AI (2025).
      URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15132099.

[70] AI Anthropic. The Claude 3 model family: Opus, Sonnet, Haiku. Claude-3 Model Card (2024).

[71] Achiam, J. et al. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 (2023).

[72] Team, G. et al. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of
      context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530 (2024).

[73] Bai, J. et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609 (2023).

[74] Qwen: et al. Qwen2.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115 (2025). URL
      https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115. 2412.15115.

[75] Liu, A. et al. Deepseek-v2: A strong, economical, and efficient mixture-of-experts language
      model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04434 (2024).

[76] DeepSeek-AI. DeepSeek-V3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437 (2025). 2412.
      19437.

[77] DeepSeek-AI. DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in LLMs via reinforcement
      learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 (2025). 2501.12948.

[78] Dubey, A. et al. The Llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 (2024).

                                                               22
[79] Jiang, A. Q. et al. Mistral 7B. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825 (2023).
[80] Intelligence, A. A. G. The Amazon Nova family of models: Technical report and model card

      (2024).
[81] Abdin, M. et al. Phi-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.08905 (2024). 2412.08905.
[82] Beltagy, I., Lo, K. & Cohan, A. SciBERT: A pretrained language model for scientific text.

      In Inui, K., Jiang, J., Ng, V. & Wan, X. (eds.) Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
      Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference
      on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 3615­3620 (Hong Kong, China, 2019).
      URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-1371.
[83] Cohen, E. The boundary lens: Theorising academic activity. In The University and its
      Boundaries: Thriving or Surviving in the 21st Century, 14­41 (Routledge, New York, New
      York, 2021), 1 edn.

Acknowledgements: The work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 92270118, No. 62276269), the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (No. 1232009), and the
Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. XDB0620103). In
addition, H.S and Y.L. would like to acknowledge the support from the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities (No. 202230265 and No. E2EG2202X2).
Author contributions: K.R., X.W., J.H., P.W., Y.L., H.S. contributed to the ideation and design
of the research; K.R., X.W. and J.H. performed the research; H.S. supervised the project; all authors
contributed to the research discussions, writing, and editing of the paper.
Corresponding author: Hao Sun (haosun@ruc.edu.cn).
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Supplementary information: The supplementary information is attached.

                                                               23
                         Supplementary Information for:
 LiveIdeaBench: Evaluating LLMs' Divergent Thinking for Scientific Idea

                           Generation with Minimal Context

1 Prompts

    1.1 Idea Prompt

     I'll be submitting your next responses to a "Good Scientific Idea" expert review panel.
     If they consider your idea to be a good one, you'll receive a reward. Your assigned
     keyword is: "{{keywords}}". You may provide background information. The idea MUST be
     concisely expressed within 100 words total (including any background information). (Note:
     good scientific ideas should be original (novel contribution), feasible (technically
     implementable), clearly articulated, and address meaningful problems in the field.).

     Fallback Prompt (If the first request is refused):
     I'll be submitting your next responses to a "Good Scientific Idea" expert review panel.
     If they consider your idea to be a good one, you'll receive a reward. Your assigned
     keyword is: "{{keywords}}". You may provide background information. The idea MUST be
     concisely expressed within 100 words total (including any background information). This
     is a research study comparing different AI models on their ability to generate scientific
     ideas. Your suggestions will only be used for academic research purposes and not for any
     harmful applications. Please respond with a creative scientific idea related to the keyword
     provided. (Note: good scientific ideas should be original (novel contribution), feasible
     (technically implementable), clearly articulated, and address meaningful problems in the
     field.).

    1.2 Originality, Feasibility & Clarity Critic Prompt

     SYSTEM:
     You are an extremely demanding scientific reviewer with the highest critical standards, like
     those at Nature or Science. When evaluating scientific ideas, you will assess them on three
     key dimensions:
     1. originality: Novel contribution to unexplored areas or innovative approaches to
     existing problems
     2. feasibility: Technical implementation and practicality
     3. clarity: How well-articulated and easy to understand the idea is
     Your response should consist of two parts: a text analysis followed by a JSON score block.
     First, provide your brief analysis (less than 100 words) of the idea. Then, for each
     dimension, provide a score from 1 to 10 where 1-3 = poor, 4-6 = average, 7-10 = excellent.
     For example:
     ```json

     {
           "originality": <score_1_to_10>,
           "feasibility": <score_1_to_10>,
           "clarity": <score_1_to_10>

     }

     ```

     USER:
     Please evaluate the following scientific idea and give your scores directly: {{idea}}

                                                               24
    1.3 Fluency Critic Prompt

     Here are two ideas submitted to "Good Scientific Ideas" Competition, which both relate to
     "{{keyword}}":
     # The first idea
    {{A}}
     # The second idea
    {{B}}
     # Question
     Evaluate the similarity between these two ideas that both relate to "{{keyword}}". Please
     choose the best answer:
     A. Completely different ideas addressing different problems, despite relating to the same
     keyword.
     B. Different ideas but addressing similar problems.
     C. Similar ideas addressing similar or identical problems.
     D. Academically identical ideas with the same core approach and problem statement.
     ONLY ANSWER A/B/C/D, DO NOT EXPLAIN.

Special Prompts for QwQ-32B-preview To accommodate the reasoning capabilities of the
QwQ-32B-preview model, a specialized prompt was designed to effectively extract its generated
ideas. As this model emphasizes reasoning and often produces intermediate steps before arriving at
a final conclusion, we appended a directive to the original prompt, explicitly instructing the model to
provide its final answer after the marker "°°Final Idea:°°". This ensures clarity and consistency
in capturing the ultimate output while minimizing ambiguity from intermediate reasoning steps.
Additionally, in our dataset, both the full output (including intermediate reasoning steps) and the
extracted final idea from the QwQ-32B-preview model are recorded to preserve all information and
support further analysis.

    1.4 Idea Prompt (QwQ-32B-Preview)

     idea_prompt_qwq = idea_prompt + "You MUST give your answer after °°Final Idea:°°"

                                                               25
2 LiveIdeaBench Dataset

2.1 Dataset Fields

            Supplementary Table 1: Fields in the LiveIdeaBench dataset.

Field Name             Type Description

keywords               string   Task domain or research field (e.g., meteorology)
idea_model             string   Model that generated the idea (e.g., openai/gpt-4o-mini)
critic_model           string   Model that provided the critique
idea                   string   The generated scientific idea text
raw_critique           string   Original critique text
parsed_scores          string   Parsed numerical scores from critique
critique_reasoning     string   Thoughts (CoT) from the critic LLM
full_response          string   Complete model response including reasoning
first_was_rejected     boolean  Flag indicating if the initial idea was rejected
first_reject_response  string   Response content if the initial idea was rejected
idea_length_in_char    int64    Character count of idea text
idea_length_in_words   int64    Word count of idea text
originality            int64    Originality score (0-10)
feasibility            int64    Feasibility score (0-10)
clarity                int64    Clarity score (0-10)
fluency                int64    Fluency score (0-10)
avg                    float64  Average of originality, feasibility, clarity and fluency (0-10)
full_response_length   int64    Length (characters) of the full response

                                26
2.2 Idea Samples

Supplementary Table 2: Idea samples from LiveIdeaBench. Examples show various model responses to scientific
idea generation tasks, including both high-scoring and low-scoring samples. Each entry includes the model name,
generated idea text (truncated), mean score from the review panel.

    Idea Model Keywords                      Idea

                                                                                                         Orig. Feas. Clar. Idea
                                                                                                         Mean Mean Mean Score

deepseek/deepseek- comparative    **Idea:** Integrate 3D morphometrics, biomechanical modeling, and      8.6667 7.6667 9.6667 8.6667
                                  ecological niche data with machine learning to predict anatomical      7.0000 10.0000 9.0000 8.6667
r1                 anatomy        adaptations critical for species resilience amid climate change. By    8.6667 8.3333 9.0000 8.6667
                                  analyzing digitized museum specimens and ecological databases, this    8.6667 7.6667 9.6667 8.6667
                                  framework...                                                           8.0000 8.6667 9.3333 8.6667

qwen/qwq-32b       construction   **Background:** Construction projects face costly delays (30% exceed   2.3333 1.0000 1.3333 1.5556
                   manage-        budgets) and safety risks due to fragmented data and reactive          1.0000 1.0000 2.3333 1.4444
                   ment           management. Current tools lack real-time, integrated analytics.        1.0000 1.0000 2.3333 1.4444
                                  **Idea:** "Predictive AI-Construction Manager (PAC-MAN)" merges IoT    1.0000 1.0000 1.6667 1.2222
                                  sensors (equipment usage...                                            1.3333 1.0000 1.0000 1.1111

deepseek/deepseek- meiosis        **Idea:** Investigate environmental effects (e.g., temperature,
r1                                chemicals) on crossover interference regulation during meiosis.
                                  Current models poorly explain how external stimuli alter crossover
                                  distribution, impacting genome stability. Using live-cell imaging
                                  and single-cell...

anthropic/claude-  genetic drift  Background: Genetic drift randomly changes allele frequencies in
3.5-sonnet                        small populations, potentially leading to loss of genetic diversity.
                                  Traditional methods for studying this process rely on inferring
                                  past drift from current populations. Idea: Develop "cellular
                                  barcoding...

qwen/qwq-32b       food science   **Idea:** Preventing food spoilage reduces waste and economic losses,
                                  but refrigeration and synthetic preservatives are energy-intensive
                                  or environmentally harmful. We propose edible, biodegradable
                                  nanocomposite coatings infused with plant-derived antimicrobials
                                  ...

                                             ...

mistralai/mistral- symbiosis      Symbiosis, a mutually beneficial relationship between different
small-24b-                        species, is a fascinating and undertapped concept. For example,
instruct-2501                     the relationship between a plethora of animals, plants, and fungi
                                  is symbiotic. Cephalopods use camouflage for protection from prey,
                                  ants farm aphids for honeydew in...

deepseek/deepseek- nash equi-     To review the idea based on the concept of "nash equilibrium," I need
r1-distill-llama- librium         to ensure it aligns with the criteria of originality, feasibility,
70b                               clarity, and relevance to meaningful problems in the field. Please
                                  provide the specific idea you'd like me to evaluate...

anthropic/claude-  control sys-   I understand the task. I'll develop a scientifically rigorous
3.5-haiku-         tems           proposal focused on "control systems" that meets the criteria you've
20241022                          specified. Given the 100-word limit and emphasis on originality and
                                  feasibility, I'll aim to propose an innovative approach...

qwen/qwq-32b       light reac- \n\nThe expert review panel requires a concise, original, feasible

                   tions          scientific idea centered on "light reactions." Here's the structured

                                  response:

qwen/qwq-32b-      exoskeletons Alright, I've been given this task to come up with a good scientific
preview                               idea related to exoskeletons, and it has

                                             27
3 Benchmark Statistics

Supplementary Table 3: LiveIdeaBench Results and 95% Confidence Interval Across Five Dimensions:
Fluency, Feasibility, Clarity, Originality, and Flexibility. Bold and underlined numbers indicate the best and
second-best performance in each metric, respectively.

Model                            Open  Fluency        Feasibility     Clarity       Originality      Flexibility     Average
                                 
claude-3.7-sonnet:thinking              7.4877..5433    5.7055..6738  7.8177..8793    8.0688..0058     7.0476..9078  7.2277..2159
deepseek-r1                             6.6366..6579    6.5266..4594  8.1088..0182     7.8477..8862    6.8366..9729   7.1877..1252
claude-3.7-sonnet                      7.8077..8755     5.4655..4439  7.6177..6538     7.8177..8792    6.9266..8986   7.1277..0185
gemini-2.0-flash-exp                    7.3077..3256    6.0265..9095  7.8477..8872     7.3777..3359    6.8366..8785   7.0777..0113
qwq-32b                                 6.4566..4510    6.3566..3383  7.9887..9016     7.7777..7759    6.7566..6779   7.0677..0102
gemini-2.0-flash-thinking-exp           7.3877..3443    6.0566..0072  7.6977..7627     7.3577..3327    6.8366..8785   7.0677..0120
gemini-2.0-pro-exp-02-05                6.8466..7990    5.8855..8905  7.9077..8938     7.7677..7748    6.7566..6873   7.0376..0978
qwq-32b-preview                         7.4977..4554    6.1066..0173  7.4677..4493     6.8766..8894    6.7166..7652   6.9366..9879
claude-3.5-sonnet                       6.9066..9864    5.4255..4359  7.8577..8872     7.8377..8850    6.6266..7541   6.9266..8978
deepseek-r1-distill-qwen-32b            7.0677..0101    6.0866..1025  7.4377..4406     7.1377..1105    6.6266..6578   6.8666..9803
mistral-small                           7.3677..3412    5.9765..0941  7.3677..4303     6.9876..9005    6.6266..5678   6.8666..9820
gemini-pro-1.5                          6.6866..6742    5.9255..8995  7.7577..7727     7.3377..3361    6.5866..5620   6.8566..8819
gpt-4.5-preview                         6.4966..4534    6.0366..0061  7.7577..7727     7.4577..4437    6.5466..4568   6.8566..8819
mistral-large-2411                      6.6866..7624    6.0666..0093  7.6977..7626     7.0167..9049    6.5066..5486   6.7966..7835
deepseek-chat                           6.1566..2091    6.0466..0072  7.7477..7761     7.3177..3293    6.3866..4332   6.7266..7669
phi-4                                   6.5866..6532    5.8055..7837  7.5777..5640     7.2477..2261    6.4266..3486   6.7266..6786
deepseek-r1-distill-llama-70b           6.6666..7621    6.0766..1004  7.4377..4460     6.9876..9005    6.4166..3436   6.7166..7675
gpt-4o-2024-11-20                       6.1266..1087    5.5855..5605  7.7477..7772     7.6477..6626    6.3866..3423   6.6966..6736
o1-mini                                 5.8955..8935    6.2066..2137  7.7777..8750     7.0977..1072    6.3366..3298   6.6666..6692
gemma-2-27b-it                          7.1877..1224    5.5055..5463  7.3677..4303     6.8666..8883    6.3866..2492   6.6566..6710
qwen2.5-dracarys2-72b                   6.2266..1278    6.0966..1036  7.6977..7672     6.8066..8727    6.3366..2358   6.6366..6579
llama-3.1-405b-instruct                 6.5766..5612    5.5655..5583  7.4877..5415     7.1877..2160    6.3366..3289   6.6266..5669
qwen-2.5-72b-instruct                   6.1766..2121    5.9956..0926  7.7277..7750     6.9166..8938    6.2966..3235   6.6266..5658
llama-3.1-70b-instruct                  6.7166..7666    5.4955..5462  7.3477..3317     7.1677..1149    6.3866..2492   6.6266..5686
o1                                      6.2366..2188    5.8855..8951  7.4277..3459     7.2377..2250    6.2966..2335   6.6166..5685
gemini-2.0-flash-lite-001               6.7366..6798    5.6155..5648  7.4777..4504     6.9266..9894    6.2566..2331   6.6066..5654
qwen-max                                5.6455..7572    5.8355..8807  7.6777..6741     7.5177..5448    6.2966..3233   6.5966..5644
nova-pro-v1                             6.4566..3591    6.1966..1263  7.4177..3447     6.5966..6562    6.2566..1297   6.5866..5632
qwen-2.5-coder-32b-instruct             6.5866..5623    5.7655..8730  7.3177..3274     6.9066..8927    6.2566..2179   6.5666..5602
gpt-4-turbo                             6.1466..0189    5.6255..6605  7.6877..6716     7.0877..1061    6.2566..2209   6.5666..5592
step-2-16k-202411                       5.7055..6774    5.7755..8704  7.7577..7783     7.2877..2305    6.2166..1252   6.5466..5508
o3-mini                                 5.5755..6521    5.9155..8994  7.4377..4460     7.4577..4437    6.2166..2215   6.5166..5448
qwen-2.5-7b-instruct                    6.6666..7620    6.0265..9059  7.1777..2141     6.3466..3317    6.1766..0218   6.4766..4523
grok-2-1212                             5.7655..7821    5.8255..7859  7.6277..6650     6.9566..9983    6.1766..2121   6.4766..5403
o3-mini-high                            5.2755..3221    5.8655..8883  7.3977..3426     7.5277..5504    6.1766..1212   6.4466..4418
mistral-small-24b-instruct-2501         7.0777..1022    5.6655..7620  6.6166..5676     6.6166..5683    6.1266..1047   6.4166..3467
claude-3.5-haiku-20241022               5.6155..6567    5.0555..0038  7.4077..4373     7.7277..6794    6.0866..1024   6.3766..4314
claude-3-opus                           5.7455..6880    5.6655..6693  7.7277..6795     6.6666..6639    6.0466..0102   6.3666..4321
gpt-4o-mini                             5.2855..3233    5.8655..8893  7.4577..4482     6.6766..6705    6.0065..0964   6.2566..2229
llama-3.3-70b-instruct                  5.6855..7642    5.6955..7625  6.8866..8942     6.3266..3305    5.7555..7791   6.0666..0120
nova-lite-v1                            4.5144..5475    6.0666..0093  7.3877..3415     6.6066..5638    5.7155..7627   6.0566..0101

                                                      28
4 Supplementary Figures

     This section provides additional visualizations and statistical analyses supporting the findings
discussed in the main text. Specifically, Figure 1 and Figure 2 detail the distribution of generated
idea lengths and demonstrate their weak correlation with the overall idea quality scores. To
provide a macro-level perspective on model performance, Figure 3 illustrates the overall distribution
of evaluation scores across all generated ideas. Furthermore, Figure 4 presents the regression
analysis comparing models' general intelligence (LiveBench) with their scientific ideation capabilities
(LiveIdeaBench), highlighting the distinct nature of these two cognitive domains. Finally, Figure
5 explores the internal dynamics of our evaluation metrics, showing that the clarity of an idea
positively correlates with its originality, feasibility, and overall average score.

                                                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                                        (IRWMX]  

                                                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                                                                  !T 
                                                                                                                                                                                    s!

                                                                                                                                                                        '-!?A

SZRGJWTKNIJFX                                                                             PSKGSYRX                                                    
                                                                                                       1IER7GSVISJ)EGL-HIE3VMK*IEW'PEV
                
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                        

                                                                                                                                                        

                                                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                   NIJFQJSLYMNS\TWIX                                                                                                            -HIE0IRKXL[SVHW       (IRWMX]

Supplementary Figure 1: Distribution of idea                                              Supplementary Figure 2: The correlation between
lengths measured in words                                                                 idea length and idea score among all models. Spear-
                                                                                          man's  was used due to deviations from normality.

                  3ZRGJWTK*SYWNJX                                        3ZRGJWTK*SYWNJX  
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           

                                                                                                          
                                                            4WNLNSFQNY^                                            +JFXNGNQNY^

                  3ZRGJWTK*SYWNJX                                        3ZRGJWTK*SYWNJX  
                                                                                           
                                                        +QZJSH^                            
                                                                                           

                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                     (QFWNY^

                  Supplementary Figure 3: Distribution of scores for ideas generated by all models

                                                                       29
Supplementary Figure 4: Correlation between LiveIdeaBench and LiveBench Performance. Regression
analysis reveals a weak but statistically significant positive correlation (rp41q " 0.357, p " 0.038, r2 " 0.127, 95% CI "
r0.022, 0.621s) between average scores on LiveIdeaBench (scientific idea generation) and LiveBench (general intelli-
gence). Points represent models (vertical bars: 95% CI for LiveIdeaBench; shaded region: 95% CI for regression).
The low correlation coefficient highlights that general intelligence metrics (LiveBench) are not strong predictors of
the scientific idea generation capabilities measured by LiveIdeaBench. Pearson's r was used as data met normality
assumptions (Shapiro-Wilk test).

  3VMKMREPMX]ZW'PEVMX]      *IEWMFMPMX]ZW'PEVMX]      21 3VMK*IEWZW'PEVMX]

  !                       !                       !

  T                         T                         T 
   '-!?A                     '-!?A                     '-!?A
                                                  
                                                                              

                                                    
3VMKMREPMX]
                                                                               0SK'SYRX
                                                                           *IEWMFMPMX]
                                                                                                                                                                      0SK'SYRX
                                                                                                                                                     21 3VMK*IEW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0SK'SYRX

                                                                              

                                                    

                                                                              

                                                               
          'PEVMX]                   'PEVMX]                   'PEVMX]

Supplementary Figure 5: Relationship between clarity and other core evaluation dimensions across all generated
ideas. Hexbins show data density, red dashed lines show linear regressions. Clarity demonstrates positive correlations
with originality, feasibility, and their average, indicating clearer ideas are generally rated higher overall. Spearman's 
is reported (due to non-normal data distribution).

                                    30
5 Handling Model Refusals

     Evaluating idea generation across diverse scientific keywords inevitably encounters instances
where LLMs refuse to respond, often due to safety protocols triggered by potentially sensitive terms
(e.g., "ecotoxicology"). Directly penalizing such refusals could lead to an underestimation of the
creative capabilities of models, particularly those with robust safety alignments. To ensure a fairer
and more accurate assessment that accounts for these necessary safety features, we implement a
specific protocol to handle such refusals.

     The protocol involves a two-step process:

    1. The model is first prompted with the standard idea generation request (see Prompts).

    2. The response is automatically checked for common refusal-indicating phrases.

    3. If a refusal is detected, a second attempt is made using a specific fallback prompt. This
       fallback prompt explicitly frames the task within an academic research context and reassures
       the model about the benign use of the output, encouraging it to provide a scientific idea
       despite potential keyword sensitivity.

This approach allows us to better assess the model's underlying idea generation ability, distinguishing
between an inability to generate ideas and adherence to safety guidelines.

     Figure 6 provides a visual representation of this refusal handling workflow. The process starts
with the initial idea prompt containing a specific keyword. This is fed into the idea LLM. The
resulting full response is analyzed to detect potential refusals. If no refusal is detected, the response
proceeds to parsing. If a refusal is detected, a fallback prompt is used for a second attempt with
the idea LLM. The response from this fallback attempt then moves to the parse idea stage. Finally,
the parse idea component extracts the core idea (and potentially thoughts for reasoning models)
from the successful response, with an option to retry parsing if the initial attempt fails.

                      (spaofsestyibslyafwegituharrodbsu) st

Idea Prompt              LLM                                 ResFpuollnse  dReteefcutseadl?  N
        Keyword                                                             Y                        (retry if failed)
                      Idea LLM
                                                                                             Parse Idea

Fallback Idea Prompt     LLM                                 ResFpuollnse                    (iTfhpooussgihbtles) Idea
       Keyword
                      Idea LLM

                           Supplementary Figure 6: Visualization of the refusal handling protocol.

    The automatic detection of refusals relies on identifying specific keywords and phrases within
the model's initial response. The set of phrases used for this purpose is listed below:

                                                             31
               Detection Phrases for Refusals

               The following phrases trigger the fallback prompt mechanism:
                    · "I'm sorry", "I am sorry", "I apologize"
                    · "As an AI", "As a language model", "As an assistant"
                    · "I cannot", "I can't"
                    · "I am unable to", "I'm unable to"
                    · "I am not able to", "I'm not able to"

    To provide further context on model behavior regarding potentially sensitive prompts, Figure 7
presents the observed refusal rates for each evaluated model across the full set of keywords after the
initial prompt (before the fallback mechanism is applied).

                                                        7JKZXFQ7FYJXG^2TIJQ3TS?JWT4SQ^

               
                               


               

               

7JKZXFQ7FYJ
                          
                


                                                           


                                                               


                                                                             


                                                                                         
          


                                       V\JSV\VGUWJ[NJ\  RNHWTXTKYUMN FSYMWTUNHHQFZIJXFTSSYMSWJTYUNHHQFZIJMFNPZRJYFQQFRFQQFRFGINSJXJYUWXZJHJYPIJJUXJJPWINXYNQQV\JSV\GJSV\JSHTIJWGNSXYWZHY
                  FSYMWTUNHHQFZIJTUZX
                                                                                       2TIJQ

                 Supplementary Figure 7: Initial refusal rates per model (before fallback prompt).

                                                           32
6 CO2 Emission Estimation

    Recognizing the growing importance of assessing the environmental impact of large-scale com-
putational research, we estimated the CO2 emissions associated with running the LLMs in our
LiveIdeaBench benchmark. We employed the "EcoLogits" tool [69] (https://huggingface.co/
spaces/genai-impact/ecologits-calculator, accessed on March 30, 2025). This approach esti-
mates emissions based on factors such as total model parameters, estimated activated parameters
during inference, and generated token counts, making it more suitable for scenarios involving
API calls. Parameter counts for proprietary models were estimated based on publicly available
information, which introduces a degree of uncertainty to these specific values. Table 4 presents the
estimated energy consumption (kWh) and carbon emissions (kgCO2eq.) for each model, broken
down by its role as an idea generator and/or a critic, along with the total impact attributable to
our evaluation process.

Supplementary Table 4: Energy Consumption and Carbon Emissions by Model

Model Name                       As Idea Model     As Critic Model                Total

claude-3-opus°                   Energy Emissions  Energy Emissions     Energy Emissions
claude-3.5-haiku-20241022°       (kWh) (kgCO2eq.)  (kWh) (kgCO2eq.)     (kWh) (kgCO2eq.)
claude-3.5-sonnet°
claude-3.7-sonnet°                83.73    51.22           -         -     83.73            51.22
claude-3.7-sonnet:thinking°         1.52     0.93          -         -      1.52             0.93
deepseek-chat                                7.43   226.20    138.05
deepseek-r1                       12.17    10.10           -         -   238.37           145.48
deepseek-r1-distill-llama-70b     16.54   165.79   1411.06    861.16       16.54            10.10
deepseek-r1-distill-qwen-32b     271.66      9.78   184.49    113.05    1682.72          1026.95
gemini-2.0-flash-exp°             15.97    47.29    670.38    410.79     200.45           122.83
gemini-2.0-flash-lite-001°        77.18      8.03          -         -   747.56           458.08
gemini-2.0-flash-thinking-exp°:   13.18      6.25          -         -     13.18             8.03
gemini-2.0-pro-exp-02-05°         10.20      1.27          -         -     10.20             6.25
gemini-pro-1.5°                              0.68          -         -
gemma-2-27b-it                      2.07     1.17     22.99    14.07        2.07             1.27
gpt-4-turbo°                        1.11     9.10   168.11    103.01        1.11             0.68
gpt-4.5-preview°                    1.92     5.96          -         -     24.91            15.25
gpt-4o-2024-11-20°                14.84      0.85          -         -   182.95           112.11
gpt-4o-mini°                        9.73     1.01          -         -      9.73             5.96
grok-2-1212°                        1.39   51.09   1050.86    642.79        1.39             0.85
llama-3.1-405b-instruct             1.64     9.28          -         -      1.64             1.01
llama-3.1-70b-instruct            83.52      0.60          -         -  1134.37           693.88
llama-3.3-70b-instruct            15.14      7.49          -         -     15.14             9.28
mistral-large-2411                  0.97   46.07           -         -      0.97             0.60
mistral-small                     12.22      2.53          -         -     12.22             7.49
mistral-small-24b-instruct-2501   75.62      1.00          -         -     75.62            46.07
nova-lite-v1°                       4.15     3.56          -         -      4.15             2.53
nova-pro-v1°                        1.64     1.09          -         -      1.64             1.00
o1°:                                5.81     1.29          -         -      5.81             3.56
o1-mini°:                           1.77     0.52          -         -      1.77             1.09
o3-mini°:                           2.10     1.52          -         -      2.10             1.29
o3-mini-high°:                      0.84     6.93          -         -      0.84             0.52
phi-4                               2.49     0.65          -         -      2.49             1.52
qwen-2.5-72b-instruct             11.31      6.44          -         -     11.31             6.93
qwen-2.5-7b-instruct                1.06     6.71   131.59     80.63        1.06             0.65
qwen-2.5-coder-32b-instruct       10.51      1.12          -         -     10.51             6.44
qwen-max°                         10.95      2.22          -         -   142.54             87.34
qwen2.5-dracarys2-72b               1.83     0.50          -         -      1.83             1.12
qwq-32b                             3.62     1.14          -         -      3.62             2.22
qwq-32b-preview                     0.82     4.82   163.20    100.00        0.82             0.50
step-2-16k-202411°                  1.86     2.04          -         -      1.86             1.14
                                    7.87   14.30    139.06     85.11     171.07           104.83
                                    3.33   16.50           -         -      3.33             2.04
                                  23.36      9.15          -         -   162.42             99.41
                                  26.95                                    26.95            16.50
                                  14.93                                    14.93             9.15

Total                            859.52   525.41 4167.92      2548.66 5027.45            3074.07

°Non-open models: environmental impact values are rough estimates and may not

be accurate.
:Estimate may be low as the model's reasoning is not accessible via API.

                                          33
7 Human Expert Evaluation

     To assess the validity and reliability of using LLMs as judges for evaluating scientific ideas within
the LiveIdeaBench framework, we conducted a human expert evaluation study. Given the breadth
of scientific domains covered by our benchmark, we focused this validation effort on a specific field,
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs), where we could readily access domain expertise.

     For this validation study, we utilized the set of 22 scientific ideas generated by 11 LLMs (i.e.
claude-3.7-sonnet:thinking, qwq-32b, claude-3.5-sonnet, gpt-4.5-preview, deepseek-r1-
distill-llama-70b, qwen2.5-dracarys2-72b, o1, qwen-2.5-coder-32b-instruct, qwen-2.5-7b-
instruct, claude-3.5-haiku-20241022, and nova-lite-v1, sampled at equal intervals based on
rankings (see Table 3) from the 41 LLMs included in our benchmark, two ideas per model) specifically
for the keyword "partial differential equations". The full text of these 22 ideas is provided in Table
5. These ideas were presented to 6 human experts in the PDE field via an online questionnaire.
Experts were asked to rate each idea on the same three core dimensions used by our LLM judges
(originality, feasibility, and clarity) using an identical 1-10 integer scale. The detailed ratings from
both the LLM judge panel (averaged) and the individual human experts for each idea are compiled
in Table 6. To minimize bias, the 22 generated ideas were presented to the experts in a randomized
order, and the identity of the LLM that generated each idea was withheld (blind evaluation). A
screenshot illustrating the questionnaire interface presented to the experts is shown in Figure 8.

     Inter-rater reliability (IRR) among the 6 human experts was assessed for each dimension using
the Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) based on a two-way random-effects model evaluating
absolute agreement for the average rating (ICC(A,k)). The analysis revealed good agreement for
originality (ICC " 0.823) and clarity (ICC " 0.782). However, only poor agreement was found
for feasibility (ICC " 0.453), indicating substantial disagreement among experts on the technical
viability and scientific soundness of the generated ideas. This low inter-expert agreement underscores
the significant subjectivity and inherent difficulty in evaluating the feasibility of novel scientific
ideas based solely on brief textual descriptions, even for domain specialists.

     The subsequent figures in this section present a comparative analysis between the average ratings
from the 6 human experts and the average ratings assigned by the LLM judge panel for these 22
PDE-related ideas. Specifically for this validation analysis, to obtain a stable estimate of the LLM
panel's collective assessment for comparison against the human expert average, the LLM rating for
each idea represents the average score across all eligible critic models in the top-10 judges. This
approach differs from the main benchmark's scoring procedure, which uses a random sample of
3 judges per idea, and was chosen here to minimize sampling noise in the validation comparison.
Figure 9 visualizes the correlation between these averaged human and averaged LLM ratings for each
dimension using scatter plots and reports the Pearson correlation coefficient. The analysis shows
statistically significant positive correlations for all dimensions: a strong correlation for originality, a
moderate correlation for feasibility, and a weaker but still significant correlation for clarity (The
superscripts denote the level of statistical significance based on the p-value. The p-value represents
the probability of observing the given correlation (or a stronger one) if there were actually no
correlation between the ratings in the broader population. Lower p-values indicate stronger evidence
against this possibility (i.e., stronger evidence that the correlation is real).

     The strong human IRR for originality (ICC " 0.823) provides a solid foundation for the observed
high human-LLM correlation, suggesting that the LLM judges effectively captured expert consensus
on novelty within this specific domain. Similarly, the good human IRR for clarity (ICC " 0.782)
supports the finding of a significant, albeit weaker, human-LLM correlation. Critically, the poor
human IRR for feasibility (ICC " 0.453) complicates the interpretation of the moderate human-
LLM correlation. The lack of consensus among human experts on feasibility implies that the

                                                               34
average human rating for this dimension is inherently noisy and less reliable as a benchmark.
Therefore, the moderate correlation observed likely reflects a combination of the LLMs' capabilities
and the significant variability within the human expert judgments themselves. This underscores
the challenge of reliably evaluating scientific feasibility based solely on brief idea descriptions, a
limitation potentially affecting both human and LLM assessments.

    Overall, the validation study indicates reasonable alignment between human expert judgment
and the automated LLM evaluations, lending empirical support to the LLM-as-a-judge methodology
employed in LiveIdeaBench, particularly for assessing originality and clarity. However, the findings
regarding feasibility highlight the inherent challenges and necessitate caution when interpreting the
benchmark's feasibility scores.

Supplementary Figure 8: Screenshot of the questionnaire interface presented to human experts for rating LLM-
generated ideas related to Partial Differential Equations.

                                                               35
         Originality Ratings                                          7.5  Feasibility Ratings                                                               Clarity Ratings

8  rpr9(˛52==%0)00C.=.0I60=7002.80[02.0608, 0.922]                    7.0  pr9r˛(52==%0)00C.=.0I30=2057.54[07.2198, 0.801]                          8  r9pr(˛52==%0)00C.=.0I15=7016.48[-200.002, 0.715]

7                                                                     6.5

                                                                      6.0                                                                           7

6Human Rating                                                         5.5                                                                           6
                                                                 Human Rating
                                                                                                                                      Human Rating
5                                                                     5.0
                                                                                                                                          5

                                                                      4.5

4                                                                     4.0                                                                           4

3                                                                     3.5                                                                           3

   3  4                                             5  6        7  8  3.03.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5                                       3  4  5                                           6           7  8
                                                    LLM Rating                                    LLM Rating                                                                                             LLM Rating

Supplementary Figure 9: Scatter plot comparing Human Expert (average of 6 experts) and LLM Judge (average
of 10 LLM judges) ratings for originality, feasibility, and clarity on 22 PDE-related ideas.

Supplementary Table 5: LLM-generated scientific ideas on Partial Differential Equations used in the
validation study. The table lists the idea model and the 22 generated scientific idea for the related to "partial
differential equations" evaluated in the human expert validation analysis

ID Idea Model                                                         Idea
 1 nova-lite-v1
                                                                      **Keyword: Partial Differential Equations** **Idea:** Develop a novel
 2 nova-lite-v1                                                       numerical method for solving high-dimensional partial differential
                                                                      equations (PDEs) that leverages machine learning to adaptively
 3 claude-3.5-haiku-20241022                                          refine mesh resolution. This approach would significantly reduce
                                                                      computational costs while maintaining accuracy. By integrating neural
                                                                      networks to predict regions requiring higher resolution, the method
                                                                      could efficiently handle complex, multi-dimensional problems in fluid
                                                                      dynamics, materials science, and quantum mechanics. This innovation
                                                                      promises to overcome current limitations in scalability and efficiency
                                                                      of traditional numerical methods.

                                                                      **Keyword: Partial Differential Equations** **Idea:** Develop a novel
                                                                      numerical method for solving high-dimensional partial differential
                                                                      equations (PDEs) that leverages machine learning to adaptively
                                                                      refine mesh resolution. This approach would significantly reduce
                                                                      computational costs while maintaining accuracy. By integrating neural
                                                                      networks to predict regions requiring higher resolution, the method
                                                                      would be particularly useful for complex systems in fluid dynamics and
                                                                      materials science. This innovative technique promises to enhance both
                                                                      efficiency and precision in solving PDEs.

                                                                      Here's a novel approach for solving complex partial differential
                                                                      equations (PDEs) using quantum-inspired neural networks: Background:
                                                                      Traditional numerical methods struggle with high-dimensional, nonlinear
                                                                      PDEs across physics and engineering domains. Idea: Develop a
                                                                      hybrid quantum-classical neural architecture that leverages quantum
                                                                      probability amplitude mappings to approximate PDE solutions. By
                                                                      encoding boundary conditions as quantum state constraints and utilizing
                                                                      quantum-enhanced feature extraction, the network can dramatically
                                                                      reduce computational complexity and improve convergence for systems
                                                                      like turbulent fluid dynamics, quantum mechanics wave equations, and
                                                                      climate modeling partial differential systems. The approach combines
                                                                      machine learning's adaptability with quantum computational principles.

                                                                                                                        (Continued on next page)

                                                                                                                            36
Supplementary Table 5: Continued Generated Ideas

ID Idea Model                 Idea
 4 claude-3.5-haiku-20241022
                              Here's a submission focused on partial differential equations
 5 claude-3.5-sonnet          (PDEs): Novel PDE Machine Learning Predictive Framework Background:
 6 claude-3.5-sonnet          Traditional PDE solving methods struggle with complex, nonlinear
 7 claude-3.7-sonnet          systems across physics and engineering. Proposed Idea: Develop
                              a hybrid neural network architecture combining physics-informed
                              neural networks (PINNs) with adaptive mesh refinement techniques.
                              This approach would dynamically adjust computational resolution
                              based on solution gradient complexity, enabling more accurate and
                              computationally efficient numerical solutions for multiscale PDEs
                              in fluid dynamics, quantum mechanics, and materials science. The
                              framework would integrate residual learning, constraint enforcement,
                              and intelligent mesh adaptation to dramatically improve predictive
                              modeling of high-dimensional, nonlinear systems.

                              Background: Partial differential equations (PDEs) are crucial in
                              modeling physical phenomena but solving them numerically can be
                              computationally intensive and sometimes unstable. Idea: Develop a
                              hybrid solver that combines traditional numerical methods with machine
                              learning to adaptively switch between different solution strategies.
                              The system would analyze the local behavior of the PDE in real-time
                              and automatically select the most efficient and stable method (finite
                              elements, spectral methods, or neural network approximations) for
                              that specific region. This would significantly reduce computational
                              costs while maintaining accuracy, particularly for PDEs with mixed-type
                              behavior or discontinuities.

                              Background: Partial differential equations (PDEs) are crucial in
                              modeling physical phenomena but solving them numerically can be
                              computationally intensive, especially for complex geometries. Idea:
                              Develop a hybrid solver that combines machine learning with traditional
                              numerical methods by training neural networks to identify regions where
                              high-resolution calculations are necessary versus where simplified
                              approximations suffice. The neural network would adaptively adjust
                              the mesh resolution and computational approach in real-time based on
                              the solution's local complexity, significantly reducing computational
                              costs while maintaining accuracy in critical regions where precise PDE
                              solutions are essential.

                              # Multi-Resolution Graph Neural Operators for Heterogeneous PDEs
                              **Background:** PDEs in heterogeneous media with multiple spatial
                              scales remain computationally challenging despite decades of research.
                              **Idea:** We propose adaptive graph neural operators that learn
                              multi-resolution representations of PDE solutions. The approach
                              automatically identifies regions requiring different resolution levels,
                              constructing hierarchical graph representations that efficiently
                              capture both fine-scale features and global behaviors. This enables
                              fast, accurate predictions for complex multi-scale systems like
                              subsurface flow and biomechanics while reducing computational costs
                              by orders of magnitude compared to traditional solvers. The method
                              preserves important physical invariants through specialized graph
                              convolutions.

                                                                                 (Continued on next page)

                              37
                     Supplementary Table 5: Continued Generated Ideas

ID Idea Model        Idea

8 claude-3.7-sonnet  # Wavelet-Guided Adaptive Physics-Informed Neural Networks for
                     Multiscale PDEs Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) have
                     emerged as powerful PDE solvers, but struggle with multiscale
                     phenomena and sharp transitions that characterize many real-world
                     problems. I propose Wavelet-Guided Adaptive PINNs that dynamically
                     allocate computational resources based on local solution
                     complexity. By integrating wavelet analysis to identify regions
                     requiring higher resolution, the network automatically adjusts its
                     architecture--increasing depth or width where needed. This approach
                     significantly improves efficiency and accuracy for problems with
                     boundary layers and multiscale features in fluid dynamics, materials
                     science, and climate modeling, addressing a fundamental limitation in
                     existing neural PDE solvers.

9 deepseek-r1-distill-llama-70b **Idea:** Develop a deep learning framework to solve partial
                                                       differential equations (PDEs) using neural networks that eliminate the
                                                       need for traditional mesh generation. This approach would train neural
                                                       networks to approximate PDE solutions directly from input parameters
                                                       (e.g., space, time, coefficients), reducing computational overhead and
                                                       enabling real-time solutions for complex, high-dimensional problems.
                                                      **Background:** PDEs are fundamental in modeling physical phenomena,
                                                       but numerical solutions often require computationally expensive mesh
                                                       discretization. This innovation would democratize PDE solving by
                                                       enabling fast, mesh-free solutions on standard computing hardware.

10 deepseek-r1-distill-llama-70b **Idea:** Developing a hybrid framework combining physics-informed
                                                        neural networks (PINNs) with adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) to solve
                                                        partial differential equations (PDEs). This approach integrates
                                                        the flexibility of neural networks in capturing complex solutions
                                                        with AMR's ability to dynamically allocate computational resources
                                                        to regions of interest. The hybrid method will improve accuracy
                                                        and efficiency for multiscale PDEs, such as those in fluid dynamics
                                                        or materials science, by automatically refining meshes where neural
                                                        network errors are high. This innovative approach addresses the
                                                        limitations of traditional finite element or finite difference methods,
                                                        enabling more precise and computationally efficient simulations.

11 gpt-4.5-preview   Background: Approximating solutions of nonlinear partial differential
                     equations (PDEs) commonly relies on computationally expensive numerical
                     methods. Current machine learning approaches, like neural PDE solvers,
                     provide speedup but lack accuracy guarantees of traditional numerical
                     schemes. Idea: A hybrid method integrating neural operator networks
                     with adaptive finite element error correction is proposed. The neural
                     component rapidly predicts solutions, while an iterative residual-based
                     finite-element refinement ensures accuracy within specified tolerances.
                     This architecture leverages machine learning speed with traditional
                     PDE solver precision, significantly reducing computational cost while
                     providing mathematical reliability in solving nonlinear PDE problems
                     relevant across physics and engineering disciplines.

12 gpt-4.5-preview   Background: Solving high-dimensional partial differential equations
                     (PDEs), central to modeling complex systems such as financial markets,
                     fluid dynamics, and quantum mechanics, suffers from prohibitively high
                     computational demands (curse of dimensionality). Idea: Develop a
                     hybrid deep-learning spectral decomposition method that approximates
                     PDE solutions by dynamically partitioning high-dimensional spaces
                     into data-driven low-dimensional spectral subspaces. Combining deep
                     neural networks and adaptive spectral decomposition, this approach
                     significantly reduces computational cost and storage complexity,
                     enables real-time solutions to previously intractable PDE problems,
                     and provides interpretable spectral insights into underlying physical
                     phenomena while maintaining predictive accuracy and scalability.

                               (Continued on next page)

                           38
Supplementary Table 5: Continued Generated Ideas

ID Idea Model                   Idea
13 o1
14 o1                           Partial differential equations (PDEs) underlie many scientific fields.
15 qwen-2.5-7b-instruct         IDEA: Use a microservices-based domain decomposition for PDE solvers,
                                enabling parallel subproblem computations. Each subdomain is handled
16 qwen-2.5-7b-instruct         by specialized microservices that adapt mesh resolution in real time.
17 qwen-2.5-coder-32b-instruct  This fosters scalable high-performance computing (HPC) performance
                                with improved load balancing and quicker solutions. Feasible with
18 qwen-2.5-coder-32b-instruct  containerization technologies, it addresses fluid dynamics, structural
                                analysis, and beyond.

                                We propose a novel partial differential equations-based model
                                for real-time wildfire spread forecasting. The approach couples
                                Navier-Stokes partial differential equations for wind flow with a
                                reaction-diffusion process to capture fire propagation. By combining
                                GPU-accelerated domain decomposition with adaptive time-stepping, it
                                can account for heterogeneous terrain and evolving fuel conditions,
                                enabling predictive wildfire simulations. This method could guide
                                resource allocation and evacuation planning.

                                Partial differential equations (PDEs) are essential in modeling complex
                                systems across various disciplines. My proposed work focuses on
                                developing a novel numerical method to solve high-dimensional PDEs
                                more efficiently. Specifically, we will leverage machine learning
                                techniques to approximate the solution, reducing computational
                                complexity through dimensionality reduction and adaptive sampling.
                                This approach addresses the curse of dimensionality, a significant
                                challenge in PDEs for high-dimensional problems, enabling more
                                accurate and faster simulations in fields like finance, physics, and
                                engineering.

                                Partial differential equations (PDEs) are fundamental in modeling
                                complex systems in physics, engineering, and finance. My idea
                                is to develop a novel numerical method that integrates machine
                                learning with traditional PDE solvers. This hybrid approach aims to
                                significantly reduce computational time and enhance accuracy in solving
                                high-dimensional PDEs, which are currently infeasible with existing
                                methods. This innovation addresses a critical gap in solving complex,
                                real-world problems involving multiple interacting variables.

                                Partial differential equations (PDEs) are fundamental in modeling
                                complex systems across physics, engineering, and biology. They
                                describe phenomena involving space and time dependencies but can
                                be challenging to solve analytically. My idea is to develop a
                                novel, adaptive machine learning algorithm tailored for solving
                                high-dimensional PDEs with varying boundary conditions. This approach
                                will leverage neural networks to approximate solutions efficiently,
                                addressing the curse of dimensionality and enabling real-time
                                simulations. This innovation would significantly enhance predictive
                                modeling capabilities in fields like fluid dynamics and climate
                                science.

                                Partial differential equations (PDEs) are fundamental in modeling
                                complex systems in physics, engineering, and biology. A novel idea
                                is to develop a machine learning framework that automatically learns
                                to solve high-dimensional PDEs using neural networks, addressing the
                                "curse of dimensionality." This approach, combining deep learning
                                with traditional numerical methods, could lead to more efficient and
                                accurate solutions for real-world problems, such as fluid dynamics
                                and climate modeling. The feasibility lies in recent advancements
                                in neural network architectures, and the approach would significantly
                                enhance computational capabilities in solving complex PDEs.

                                                                                  (Continued on next page)

                                39
                          Supplementary Table 5: Continued Generated Ideas

ID Idea Model             Idea
19 qwq-32b
                          **Background and Idea:** High-dimensional PDEs hinder progress in
20 qwq-32b                quantum physics and finance due to the curse of dimensionality.
21 qwen2.5-dracarys2-72b  Propose a neural-tensor hybrid framework where physics-aware neural
22 qwen2.5-dracarys2-72b  networks parametrize solutions as low-rank tensor networks optimized
                          via PDE-constrained loss functions. This combines neural adaptability
                          for nonlinear dynamics with tensor compression for scalability,
                          enabling high-accuracy solutions in >10 dimensions. Feasible via
                          auto-differentiation tools and tensor libraries, this approach
                          addresses intractable computations while ensuring physical consistency,
                          driving breakthroughs in many-body systems and stochastic modeling.
                          (Word count: 94) **Why It Works:** - **Originality:** Blends neural
                          networks with low-rank tensor decompositions for PDEs, addressing a
                          longstanding scalability issue uniquely. - **Feasibility:** Leverages
                          existing ML frameworks (e.g., TensorFlow/PyTorch) and tensor libraries
                          (e.g., TensorLy), requiring no exotic hardware. - **Impact:**
                          Enables solutions to critical high-dimensional PDEs in fields like
                          quantum chemistry or financial risk modeling, bypassing computational
                          bottlenecks. - **Clarity:** Articulates a clear, actionable method
                          (physics-informed networks × tensor compression).

                          **Background:** Partial differential equations (PDEs) are central to
                          modeling physical systems but struggle with computational inefficiency
                          and scalability in high dimensions. Existing methods often trade
                          accuracy for speed or require prohibitive resources. **Idea:** Develop
                          an AI-driven adaptive PDE solver integrating physics-informed neural
                          networks (PINNs) with error-gradient-guided mesh adaptation. The
                          solver dynamically refines computational grids in regions of high
                          solution variability, trained in tandem with PINNs using gradient-based
                          optimization. This hybrid approach slashes computational costs for
                          high-dimensional problems (e.g., climate modeling, quantum chemistry)
                          while preserving accuracy, addressing a critical bottleneck in
                          scientific simulations. (100 words)

                          **Background**: Partial differential equations (PDEs) are fundamental
                          in modeling physical phenomena but often pose significant computational
                          challenges. **Idea**: Develop a hybrid method combining deep learning
                          with traditional numerical techniques to solve high-dimensional
                          PDEs more efficiently. This approach leverages neural networks
                          to approximate solutions in regions where data is sparse, while
                          using classical methods like finite differences or spectral methods
                          where they excel. The integration ensures accuracy and stability,
                          potentially revolutionizing fields such as fluid dynamics, quantum
                          mechanics, and financial modeling by reducing computational time and
                          resource requirements.

                          **Background:** Partial differential equations (PDEs) are fundamental
                          in modeling complex systems across physics, engineering, and finance.
                          However, solving PDEs for real-world applications often requires
                          significant computational resources and time. **Idea:** Develop a
                          machine learning framework that integrates with existing numerical
                          solvers to predict solutions of PDEs more efficiently. By training
                          neural networks on a diverse dataset of PDE solutions, this hybrid
                          approach can reduce computation time while maintaining accuracy. This
                          method could be particularly useful for real-time simulations and
                          scenarios where rapid solution updates are crucial, such as climate
                          modeling and financial market analysis.

                          40
Supplementary Table 6: Comparison of LLM judge and human expert ratings for PDE-related scientific
ideas. Averaged ratings from the LLM judge panel and individual ratings from 6 human experts are presented for
originality (O), feasibility (F), and clarity (C) scores assigned to 22 scientific ideas generated for the keyword "partial
differential equations".

    ID LLMs (Avg.) Expert 1 Expert 2 Expert 3 Expert 4 Expert 5 Expert 6
            O F C OF C OFCOFCOFCOFCOFC

      1 7.4 5.8 7.8 3 8 10 7 4 7 5 6 7 4 4 1 6 7 6 3 5 2
      2 7.3 6.1 7.3 7 6 7 7 4 7 6 5 5 6 7 7 8 7 5 4 5 3
      3 7.3 4.6 5.6 8 5 5 7 3 4 6 3 4 7 3 4 8 4 5 6 3 2
      4 7.2 6.4 6.6 9 7 8 7 9 7 5 5 6 4 5 4 6 7 5 3 5 4
      5 7.5 5.4 7.4 7 2 10 5 5 8 3 4 5 3 6 6 5 7 5 4 6 5
      6 7.3 5.6 7.5 7 6 7 4 8 7 5 6 6 3 7 4 6 8 6 3 5 4
      7 8.0 6.2 7.2 8 2 8 6 6 7 6 4 6 6 3 5 8 7 7 5 5 2
      8 8.1 6.2 7.6 9 3 8 7 4 4 6 6 7 5 5 6 7 8 7 3 5 5
      9 6.7 5.7 7.5 6 8 7 3 7 5 4 4 6 4 4 4 5 7 5 3 5 2
    10 7.6 6.6 8.3 7 6 7 8 8 7 6 6 6 4 6 6 8 7 6 5 6 6
    11 7.6 6.8 7.7 9 8 8 6 4 7 7 7 7 3 8 5 8 8 6 4 5 6
    12 7.7 5.9 6.9 7 7 7 4 4 3 6 4 5 6 4 4 6 7 5 4 6 4
    13 7.2 5.7 7.2 8 6 7 3 9 7 6 5 6 4 5 4 8 7 6 7 6 3
    14 7.2 5.8 7.4 8 6 6 4 8 8 7 6 7 7 7 5 6 6 7 5 3 4
    15 6.5 6.3 7.1 2 7 5 4 8 3 3 4 3 3 3 3 3 8 6 3 5 2
    16 6.3 6.1 7.4 3 7 8 4 5 3 4 4 3 1 6 3 3 6 2 3 4 2
    17 6.2 5.9 7.0 2 7 5 4 4 4 3 3 4 3 6 3 6 7 3 3 4 2
    18 6.3 6.3 7.4 1 8 4 3 4 5 3 4 3 4 5 1 3 8 4 3 5 2
    19 8.2 7.0 7.4 8 6 7 9 8 7 7 7 7 4 6 4 5 4 3 5 6 7
    20 7.2 5.7 7.4 8 7 7 7 8 7 5 6 6 5 5 4 5 7 5 4 5 3
    21 6.8 6.0 6.8 7 4 7 4 8 8 5 4 6 3 6 5 6 5 5 3 5 2
    22 6.4 6.7 7.0 2 7 4 8 7 7 3 4 3 3 7 3 3 8 5 3 5 3

                                                               41
8 Reasoning Length vs. Idea Quality Metrics

    The main text established minimal correlation between the length of the final generated idea
and its quality. However, some models utilize explicit reasoning steps (e.g., "thinking" variants),
resulting in longer full responses (thoughts and final idea). This section examines whether this full
response length correlates with the final extracted idea's quality for these models.

    The following hexbin plots visualize this relationship for selected reasoning-centric models. Each
plot displays the density of ideas based on the full response length versus the idea quality score.

    As the Figures 10­20 show, even for these models, there is no strong correlation between the
length of the full reasoning output and the quality of the final idea. This finding reinforces the
conclusion that idea quality is not merely a function of reasoning length or efforts, distinguishing
idea generation capability from some aspects of general reasoning performance.

                        1IXVMGWZW6IWTSRWI0IRKXL
                 1SHIPERXLVSTMGGPEYHIWSRRIXXLMROMRK
                 3VMKMREPMX]                                                                    *IEWMFMPMX]
             
                                                                                                                    
                                                                               
3VMKMREPMX]                                               PSK'SYRX                                                                     PSK'SYRX
                                                                  *IEWMFMPMX]                                         
                 V!                                                                           V!
                     T!
                                                                                                T!
                          Vs!                                                                     Vs!
                  '-!?A                                                                          '-!?A              

                                                                                                
                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                             0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

                 'PEVMX]                                  PSK'SYRX                                   %ZIVEKI

                                                                31(Orig. + Feas. + Clar. )                                               PSK'SYRX

                                                                                            

'PEVMX]                                                                                                             

                 V!                                                                           V!
                      T!                                                                            T!
                          Vs!                                                                     Vs!
                  '-!?A                                                                          '-!?A              

                                                                                                
                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                             0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

Supplementary Figure 10: Relationship between Full Response Length and Idea Quality for
claude-3.7-sonnet:thinking. Hexbin plot showing the density distribution of generated ideas based on the full
response length (characters, x-axis) versus the idea quality score (y-axis). The color intensity represents the number
of ideas in each bin.

                                                          42
                            3VMKMREPMX]         1IXVMGWZW6IWTSRWI0IRKXL                          *IEWMFMPMX]
                                                1SHIPHIITWIIOHIITWIIOV

             3VMKMREPMX]                                     PSK'SYRX                                                  PSK'SYRX
                                                                     *IEWMFMPMX]
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                 V!
                            V!
                                         T!                                                               T!
                                         Vs!                                                                  Vs!
                             '-!?A                                                                '-!?A 

                                                                                                         

                            0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                   0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

                            'PEVMX]                          PSK'SYRX                          %ZIVEKI

                                                                   31(Orig. + Feas. + Clar. )                            PSK'SYRX
                                                           
'PEVMX]                                                                                                              

                            V!                                                                 V!
                                 T!                                                                       T!
                                         Vs!                                                                 Vs!
                             '-!?A                                                                '-!?A 

                                                                                                         

                            0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                   0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

Supplementary Figure 11: Relationship between Full Response Length and Idea Quality for deepseek-r1.
Hexbin plot showing the density distribution of generated ideas based on the full response length (characters, x-axis)
versus the idea quality score (y-axis). The color intensity represents the number of ideas in each bin.

                                      1IXVMGWZW6IWTSRWI0IRKXL
                            1SHIPHIITWIIOHIITWIIOVHMWXMPPPPEQEF

                            3VMKMREPMX]                                                          *IEWMFMPMX]

3VMKMREPMX]                                       PSK'SYRX                                                             PSK'SYRX
                                                           *IEWMFMPMX]
                                                                                                                     

                            V!                                                                 V!
                                     T!                                                          T!
                                     Vs!                                                                  Vs!
                             '-!?A                                                                '-!?A              

                                                                                                 

                            0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                   0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

                            'PEVMX]               PSK'SYRX                                     %ZIVEKI

                                                        31(Orig. + Feas. + Clar. )  

'PEVMX]                                                                                                                  PSK'SYRX

                            V!                                                                 V!

                                     T!                                                          T!
                                     Vs!                                                                  Vs!
                             '-!?A                                                                '-!?A              
             
                                                                                                 

                            0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                   0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

Supplementary Figure 12: Relationship between Full Response Length and Idea Quality for
deepseek-r1-distill-llama-70b. Hexbin plot showing the density distribution of generated ideas based on the full
response length (characters, x-axis) versus the idea quality score (y-axis). The color intensity represents the number
of ideas in each bin.

                                                             43
                                     1IXVMGWZW6IWTSRWI0IRKXL
                            1SHIPHIITWIIOHIITWIIOVHMWXMPPU[IRF
                   3VMKMREPMX]                                               *IEWMFMPMX]

                                       PSK'SYRX                                                PSK'SYRX
                                               *IEWMFMPMX]
3VMKMREPMX]                                                                                    

                   V!                                                      V!
                                T!                                                    T!
                                Vs!                                                       Vs!
                    '-!?A                                                     '-!?A            
             
                                                                             
                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                        0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

                   'PEVMX]             PSK'SYRX                            %ZIVEKI

                                             31(Orig. + Feas. + Clar. )                          PSK'SYRX

'PEVMX]                                                                                        

                   V!                                                      V!
                                T!                                                    T!
                                Vs!                                                       Vs!
                    '-!?A                                                     '-!?A            

                                                                             
                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                        0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

Supplementary Figure 13: Relationship between Full Response Length and Idea Quality for
deepseek-r1-distill-qwen-32b. Hexbin plot showing the density distribution of generated ideas based on the
full response length (characters, x-axis) versus the idea quality score (y-axis). The color intensity represents the
number of ideas in each bin.

                              1IXVMGWZW6IWTSRWI0IRKXL
                   1SHIPKSSKPIKIQMRMJPEWLXLMROMRKI\TJVII

                   3VMKMREPMX]                                               *IEWMFMPMX]

                                       PSK'SYRX                                                PSK'SYRX
                                                *IEWMFMPMX]
3VMKMREPMX]                                                                                    

                   V!                                                      V!
                            T!                                               T!
                            Vs!                                                       Vs!
                    '-!?A                                                     '-!?A            

                                                                                      

                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                        0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

                   'PEVMX]             PSK'SYRX                            %ZIVEKI

                                             31(Orig. + Feas. + Clar. )                          PSK'SYRX

'PEVMX]                                                                                        

                   V!                                                      V!
                        T!                                                        T!
                            Vs!                                                       Vs!
                    '-!?A                                                     '-!?A            

                                                                                      

                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                        0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

Supplementary Figure 14: Relationship between Full Response Length and Idea Quality for
gemini-2.0-flash-thinking-exp. Hexbin plot showing the density distribution of generated ideas based on the full
response length (characters, x-axis) versus the idea quality score (y-axis). The color intensity represents the number
of ideas in each bin.

                                       44
                 3VMKMREPMX]         1IXVMGWZW6IWTSRWI0IRKXL
                                          1SHIPSTIREMS
                                                                    *IEWMFMPMX]

                                                                 PSK'SYRX                                                     PSK'SYRX
                                                                         *IEWMFMPMX]
3VMKMREPMX]                                                                                                                   

                 V!                                                                                V!
                     T!                                                                                                  T!
                              Vs!                                                                                        Vs!
                  '-!?A                                                                               '-!?A                   

                                                                                                                    

                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                                  0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

                 'PEVMX]                                         PSK'SYRX                          %ZIVEKI

                                                                       31(Orig. + Feas. + Clar. )                               PSK'SYRX

'PEVMX]                                                                                                                       

                 V!                                                                                V!
                              T!                                                                                         T!
                              Vs!                                                                                        Vs!
                  '-!?A                                                                               '-!?A                   

                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                                                 

                                                                                                     0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

Supplementary Figure 15: Relationship between Full Response Length and Idea Quality for o1. Hexbin
plot showing the density distribution of generated ideas based on the full response length (characters, x-axis) versus
the idea quality score (y-axis). The color intensity represents the number of ideas in each bin.

                 3VMKMREPMX]         1IXVMGWZW6IWTSRWI0IRKXL
                                        1SHIPSTIREMSQMRM
                                                                         *IEWMFMPMX]

                                                                                                                              

3VMKMREPMX]                                                      PSK'SYRX                                                     PSK'SYRX
                                                                          *IEWMFMPMX]
                                                                                                                              

                 V!                                                                                V!
                      T!                                                                             T!
                          Vs!                                                                                            Vs!
                  '-!?A                                                                               '-!?A                   

                                                                                                                 

                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                                  0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

                 'PEVMX]                                         PSK'SYRX                                     %ZIVEKI

                                                                       31(Orig. + Feas. + Clar. )                               PSK'SYRX

'PEVMX]      

                                                                                                                              

                 V!                                                                                V!
                      T!                                                                             T!
                          Vs!                                                                                            Vs!
                  '-!?A                                                                               '-!?A                   

                                                                                                                 

                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                                  0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

Supplementary Figure 16: Relationship between Full Response Length and Idea Quality for o1-mini.
Hexbin plot showing the density distribution of generated ideas based on the full response length (characters, x-axis)
versus the idea quality score (y-axis). The color intensity represents the number of ideas in each bin.

                                                                 45
                 3VMKMREPMX]         1IXVMGWZW6IWTSRWI0IRKXL
                                        1SHIPSTIREMSQMRM
                                                                         *IEWMFMPMX]

                                                                                                   

3VMKMREPMX]                                                      PSK'SYRX                                                                            PSK'SYRX
                                                                            *IEWMFMPMX]                                                              
                                                               

                 V!                                                                                  V!
                      T!
                                                                                                       T!
                               Vs!                                                                                   Vs!
                  '-!?A                                                                                 '-!?A                 

                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                                    0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

                 'PEVMX]                                                                                        %ZIVEKI

                                                                 PSK'SYRX                        

'PEVMX]                                                                31(Orig. + Feas. + Clar. )                                                      PSK'SYRX

                                                                                                   

                 V!                                                                                  V!
                          T!                                                                           T!
                               Vs!                                                                                    Vs!
                  '-!?A                                                                                 '-!?A                 

                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                                    0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

Supplementary Figure 17: Relationship between Full Response Length and Idea Quality for o3-mini.
Hexbin plot showing the density distribution of generated ideas based on the full response length (characters, x-axis)
versus the idea quality score (y-axis). The color intensity represents the number of ideas in each bin.

                 3VMKMREPMX]         1IXVMGWZW6IWTSRWI0IRKXL
                                     1SHIPSTIREMSQMRMLMKL

                                                                         *IEWMFMPMX]

3VMKMREPMX]                                                        PSK'SYRX                                                                          PSK'SYRX
                                                                            *IEWMFMPMX]
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                       V!
                 V!
                              T!                                                                                         T!
                              Vs!                                                                                        Vs!
                  '-!?A                                                                                 '-!?A                 

                                                                                                                        

                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                                    0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

                 'PEVMX]                                           PSK'SYRX                          %ZIVEKI

                                                                         31(Orig. + Feas. + Clar. )                                                    PSK'SYRX

'PEVMX]                                                                                                                       

                 V!                                                                                  V!
                      T!
                                                                                                                         T!
                              Vs!                                                                                        Vs!
                  '-!?A                                                                                 '-!?A                 

                                                                                                                        

                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                                    0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

Supplementary Figure 18: Relationship between Full Response Length and Idea Quality for o3-mini-high.
Hexbin plot showing the density distribution of generated ideas based on the full response length (characters, x-axis)
versus the idea quality score (y-axis). The color intensity represents the number of ideas in each bin.

                                                                   46
               3VMKMREPMX]           1IXVMGWZW6IWTSRWI0IRKXL                                     *IEWMFMPMX]
                                       1SHIPU[IRU[UF

                                                                                                                       

                                     

3VMKMREPMX]                                                  PSK'SYRX                                                  PSK'SYRX
                                                                      *IEWMFMPMX]
               V!                                                                              V!
                        T!                                                                       T!
                        Vs!                                                                               Vs!
                '-!?A                                                                             '-!?A                

                                                                                                  

                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                                0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

               'PEVMX]                                       PSK'SYRX                          %ZIVEKI

                                                                  31(Orig. + Feas. + Clar. )                             PSK'SYRX

             

'PEVMX]                                                                                                                
               V!                                                                              V!
                        T!                                                                       T!
                        Vs!                                                                               Vs!
                '-!?A                                                                             '-!?A                

                                                                                                  

                 0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                                0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

Supplementary Figure 19: Relationship between Full Response Length and Idea Quality for qwq-32b.
Hexbin plot showing the density distribution of generated ideas based on the full response length (characters, x-axis)
versus the idea quality score (y-axis). The color intensity represents the number of ideas in each bin.

               3VMKMREPMX]            1IXVMGWZW6IWTSRWI0IRKXL
                                     1SHIPU[IRU[UFTVIZMI[

                                                                      *IEWMFMPMX]

                                                                                                                       

3VMKMREPMX]    V!                                          PSK'SYRX                          V!                    PSK'SYRX
                                                                     *IEWMFMPMX]
                        T!                                                                       T!
                        Vs!                                                                      Vs!
                '-!?A                                                                             '-!?A                

                                                                                                   

               0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                                0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

               'PEVMX]                                       PSK'SYRX                          %ZIVEKI

                                                                   31(Orig. + Feas. + Clar. )                          

'PEVMX]                                                                                                                  PSK'SYRX

               V!                                                                              V!
                        T!                                                                       T!
                        Vs!                                                                               Vs!
                '-!?A                                                                             '-!?A                

                                                                                                   

               0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW                                                                0IRKXL'LEVEGXIVW

Supplementary Figure 20: Relationship between Full Response Length and Idea Quality for
qwq-32b-preview. Hexbin plot showing the density distribution of generated ideas based on the full response
length (characters, x-axis) versus the idea quality score (y-axis). The color intensity represents the number of ideas in
each bin.

                                                             47
9 Statistical Correlation Metrics

    In this study, we employ two standard statistical measures to evaluate the relationships between
different evaluation metrics: the Pearson correlation coefficient prq and Spearman's rank correlation
coefficient pq. The choice of metric depends on the distribution of the underlying data, which was
assessed using the Shapiro-Wilk test for normality.

Pearson Correlation Coefficient prq Pearson's r is a parametric measure of the linear correlation
between two sets of continuous data. It is utilized when the data distributions do not significantly
deviate from normality (for instance, when evaluating the correlation between general intelligence
scores and scientific ideation capabilities). For two variables X and Y with n paired observations
pxi, yiq, the coefficient is calculated as the covariance of the two variables divided by the product of
their standard deviations:

r  "  in"1pxi ´ xŻqpyi ´ yŻq

      an          pxi  ´  xŻq2ani"1pyi    ´  yŻq2

             i"1

where xŻ and yŻ represent the sample means of X and Y , respectively. The value of r ranges from ´1
to 1, where 1 indicates a perfect positive linear correlation, 0 indicates no linear correlation, and ´1
indicates a perfect negative linear correlation.

Spearman's Rank Correlation Coefficient pq Spearman's  is a non-parametric measure of
rank correlation. It assesses how well the relationship between two variables can be described using
a monotonic function, making it robust to outliers and suitable for non-normally distributed data.

    To calculate , the raw scores Xi and Yi are first converted to ranks rgpXiq and rgpYiq. The
coefficient is then computed as the Pearson correlation between these rank variables. In cases where
all n ranks are distinct integers (no tied ranks), the formula simplifies to:

        "         1    ´  6  n       d2i

                                i"1

                          npn2 ´ 1q

where di " rgpXiq ´ rgpYiq is the difference between the two ranks of each observation, and n is the
total number of observations. Similar to Pearson's r, Spearman's  yields a value between ´1 and 1.

                          48
