REMARKS ON THE DISPROOF OF THE UNIT DISTANCE CONJECTURE
NOGA ALON, THOMAS F. BLOOM, W. T. GOWERS, DANIEL LITT, WILL SAWIN, ARUL SHANKAR, JACOB TSIMERMAN, VICTOR WANG, AND MELANIE MATCHETT WOOD
Abstract. We present a short, digested, human-verified version of the recent OpenAI-generated counterexample to the Erds unit distance conjecture, and a sequence of reflections on it. The argument relies crucially on ideas that may, at least in retrospect, be attributed to EllenbergVenkatesh, Golod-Shafarevich, and Hajir-Maire-Ramakrishna.

Contents
1. Introduction 2. Proof and further overview 3. Noga Alon 4. Thomas Bloom

5. W T Gowers

6. Daniel Litt

1

7. Will Sawin

3

8. Arul Shankar

7

9. Jacob Tsimerman

7

9

10. Victor Wang

16

12

11. Melanie Matchett Wood

17

13

References

17

15

16

1. Introduction
The following result is due to an internal model at OpenAI. The proof we give in these remarks is a human-digested, somewhat simplified, and somewhat generalized version of the AI proof.1

Theorem 1.1. There exists  > 0 such that the following holds. There exists a sequence of point sets Pi in R2 such that |Pi|   and the number of unit distances in Pi is at least |Pi|1+ for all i.

1.1. History of the problem. The unit distance problem was originally raised in work of Erds

[14]. In his original work, he noted that a set of n points may have at most O(n3/2) unit distances

via noting that the unit distance graph cannot at most 2 points) while using a n× n grid to

contain a K2,3 (two show that a set of n

unit circles points may

can only intersect have n1+(1/ log log

in
n)

unit distances. The best current upper bound, O(n4/3), is due to Spencer, Szemerédi, and Trotter

[32]. An upper bound of n1+o(1) was conjectured by Erds; see [6] for details.

For more background, the reader may consult the introduction of Alon, Buci, and Sauermann

[2], a recent paper on the unit distance and distinct distances problems for generic norms, which

are shown to behave rather differently than the usual Euclidean norm on R2. Indeed, Alon has

remarked that problems in discrete geometry like this one are closely connected to deep questions in

real algebraic geometry and number theory, as they deal with common roots of natural sets of real

polynomials. A similar insight appears to be part of the Chain-of-Thought (CoT) of the AI proof

of Theorem 1.1: ". . . in principle all extremal examples can be taken algebraic. But the degree and

height of that algebraic realization can be enormous. . . Maybe that enormous degree is not just an

annoyance but a source of possible counterexamples. Number fields deserve a closer look."

The idea of trying to use number fields to construct counterexamples is not altogether new, but

there are subtleties to making it work (discussed in some of the reflections in this note), especially

considering that perhaps most experts believed the conjecture n1+o(1) to be true.

1.2. Sketch of the proof. One starting point of the proof is to construct a large set U of magnitude-1 algebraic numbers of bounded denominator D in a number field K, in terms of the class

1Throughout this document, phrases such as "AI proof" or "GPT proof" all refer to the same file, which was first mathematically generated in one shot by an internal model at OpenAI, and then expositionally refined through human interactions with Codex.
1

number h(K) and the splitting behavior of various prime ideals. This will be done in Lemma 2.2 using the pigeonhole principle, along the lines of an idea of Michel, Soundararajan, Ellenberg, and Venkatesh recorded in [10].
It turns out to be convenient to assume K is a CM field. A key reason for this is that an element of a CM field has absolute value 1 in some embedding if and only if it has absolute value 1 in all embeddings. This will be convenient for ensuring that many elements of U appear as differences x - y of elements x, y  W for a nice bounded window W of D-1OK, to be discussed below.
The bounded window is constructed using either the geometry of numbers, or an averaging (unfolding) argument. This step requires embedding the ring of algebraic integers OK of K as a lattice inside K  R. Equivalently, for a more analytically-minded reader, it requires working with not just a single absolute value on K, but the sup-norm over all conjugate absolute values on K.
The set of unit distance pairs created in W decreases as the root discriminant of K increases, and thus it is advantageous to let K be a finite layer of an infinite class field tower M of GolodShafarevich type, with [K : Q]  , since such K have bounded root discriminant. The simplest way to make U large in Lemma 2.2 is to ensure that this tower M has at least one split rational prime q. This fixed prime q will split into many primes in K as [K : Q]  , and when used appropriately this drowns out the main enemies, the class number h(K) and discriminant Disc K, which are relatively mild thanks to the controlled ramification in M . Fixing an embedding K  C, we obtain the desired sequence of point sets PK := W  C = R2, indexed by fields K.
The AI argument originally required a suitably large finite number of split primes. Construction of such Golod-Shafarevich towers is, however, not the novel part of the argument. The construction of Golod-Shafarevich towers with not just a single split prime, but infinitely many split primes, already appears in the literature [20] and has been used for other applications.
1.3. Context for the proof. The original grid construction can be thought of as an application of Lemma 2.2 to the CM field K = Q(i). Counting magnitude-1 algebraic numbers of bounded Weil height in a fixed CM field K has also been done before; see, for instance, [1, 4]. A novel ingredient of the AI argument is to take [K : Q]  . In classical Diophantine terms, if
r2,F () := |{(x, y)  OF2 : x2 + y2 = }|
denotes the number of ways to write   OF as a sum of two squares, where F is a totally real number field, then one corollary of the argument is that there exist rational integers D  1 such that r2,F (4D2) grows exponentially in [F : Q] along an infinite tower of fields F . Similar phenomena occur in the large-q aspect of analytic number theory over function fields Fq(t), with log q being roughly analogous to [F : Q]. In contrast, r2,F (4D2)  OF,(D) for any fixed F and  > 0.
Infinite sequences of number fields have previously led to interesting combinatorial constructions. Relatively recent examples include Venkatesh's sphere-packing construction [36], and the work of Kopp et al. on equiangular lines, ray class fields, and the Stark conjectures [3, 22].
The fact that infinite class field towers provide lattices with strong asymptotic properties has been applied before in a number of nearby settings. Lenstra [23] used such infinite class field towers to construct codes and study their asymptotic properties. Litsyn and Tsfasman [25, Section 7] introduced lattice sphere packings using lattices from infinite class field towers. This led to many further papers in coding theory studying asymptotic properties of these codes--some examples include [17,24,27,28,35]. See also [34] for a nice exposition of these lattices in the context of coding theory and sphere packing. Sphere packing and coding theory are inherently high dimensional problems, and so the idea to use points from a high dimensional lattice is natural. (To be clear, OK embeds into C as an abelian group, which is used to extract the final point sets for Theorem 1.1. But it does not satisfy the discreteness axiom of a lattice if [K : Q]  3.)
Belolipetsky­Lubotzky [5] is an example of class field towers used to count lattices inside a fixed Lie group.
2

Ellenberg and Venkatesh [10, Lemma 2.3] famously used small split primes to bound the -torsion in the class group of a number field. They consider Pi for various split primes Pi and use the prigeonhole principle to get two ideals representing the same element of the class group, and then use that ratio to produce an element of the number field which has small archimedian valuations and also bounded denominator. At this level of description that is similar to the the strategy used here in Lemma 2.2, but many of the details and parameters of interest in the application are rather different, e.g. [10] only needed one element of the number field and the precise size of the denominator was relevant, whereas the application of Lemma 2.2 is to produce many elements and the size of the denominator is not relevant to Theorem 1.1 (but may be relevant in optimizations).
In Proposition 2.3 we will briefly review the Frobenius-cutting argument of [20] and how it can be applied to our situation to obtain infinitely many split primes. A weaker version of this argument, cutting out relations only at a fixed finite depth, was used in the original GPT paper.
1.4. Organization of the paper. In Section 2 we give a complete proof of Theorem 1.1. After Section 2, we collect a sequence of reflections on the proof and comments on the AI solution.
Acknowledgements. We thank Peter Sarnak and Kannan Soundararajan for helpful discussions. NA is supported by NSF grant DMS-2154082. TB is a Royal Society University Research Fellow. WTG is a Professor at the Collčge de France and a Research Professor at the University of Cambridge. His work in automatic theorem proving is supported by the Astera Foundation. DL is supported by an NSERC grant, "Anabelian methods in arithmetic and algebraic geometry," a Sloan research fellowship, a Connaught New Researcher Award, and an Ontario Early Researcher Award. WS is supported by NSF grant DMS-2502029 and was a Sloan Research Fellow. AS is supported by an NSERC discovery grant. JT was partially supported by the Institute for Advanced Study, and the Charles Simonyi Endowment. VW is supported by NSTC grant 114-2115-M-001-010-MY2. MMW is supported by a Packard Fellowship for Science and Engineering, NSF Waterman award DMS-2140043, and a MacArthur Fellowship.

2. Proof and further overview

2.1. Statements of Main Lemmas. We state here two lemmas, and motivate the entire argument

around these lemmas. The lemmas are the key novelty. We also prove Theorem 1.1 from the lemmas.

First, we give the geometry-of-numbers lemma. In Cf , let BR := {(x1, . . . , xf ) | |xi|  R for all i}, a polydisc of "radius" R. For a subset S  Cf , let US := {(x1, . . . , xf )  S | |xi| = 1 for all i}, the outermost points on the boundary of the region B1  Cf . If we have a lattice  where U is large,

then we can form a point-set in the plane with many unit distances by taking U  BR for some

R, and then projecting to any coordinate of C. Since every lattice point in BR-1 translated by any

point

in

U

is

in

BR,

if

the

projection

is

injective,

we

obtain

at

least

1 2

|U||



BR-1

|

unit

distance

pairs among at most |  BR| points. The following lemma quantifies the size of these sets.

Lemma 2.1. Let f be a positive integer, and 0 <   1. Let  be a full rank lattice in Cf , such
that for all non-zero x  , at least one coordinate xi of x has |xi|  . Further assume that the projection of  onto one of the coordinates of Cf is injective. Let v  -2 covol()1/f .
Suppose that |U|  uf for some u > 0. Then for every R  2, there exists a translate a +  of  such that the set (a + )  BR projected onto a coordinate gives a point set P in the plane with

2(P) 

uR2 f 4v2 and |P| 
3

9R2 f 2 .

Observe

that

9R2-2

>

1,

since

R



2

and





1.

Thus

given

v,

if

we

can

make

u

>

36v 

,

we

can

choose any R  2 and then

log(2 (P )) log |P|



log

uR2 4v2

log

9R2 2

> 1.

(2.1)

If

we

can

make

u

>

36v 

and

keep

u, v, 

constant

while

letting

f





and

still

finding

lattices

satisfying

Lemma

2.1,

then

we

have

|P |





(since

| (P )|



),

while

log(2(P )) log |P|

stays

bounded

below by a number larger than 1, proving Theorem 1.1.

Remark. Note the above argument does not require making u large in terms of . This is important, as the argument here does not have the flexibility to do that, and indeed produces -1 quite large
in terms of u.

The parameter v bounds the "skewness" of the lattice . Taking constant size scalings of Minkowski lattices of algebraic integers in (totally imaginary) number fields of growing degree but bounded root discriminant, which are well-known to exist by work of Golod-Shafarevich, will keep , v constant while f  . So the remaining challenge is to produce many elements of these fields with complex absolute value 1 in every embedding, so that we can make u large compared to v.
This will be done by Lemma 2.2. Let e(P ) denote the ramification index of a prime ideal P in a number field K. For the sake of exposition the following result is more general than necessary, which may also be useful to readers interested in modifying or optimizing the overall method.

Lemma 2.2. Let K be a number field embedded in C. Assume K = K, where K denotes the complex conjugate of K. Let P1, . . . , Ps be pairwise distinct prime ideals of OK such that Pi = P j for all 1  i, j  s. Let k1, . . . , ks be positive integers. Let
s
Q := (PjP j)kj  OK
j=1

be an ideal. Let U := {u  Q-2 : |u| = 1}. Then

|U | 

js=1(kj

+

1) .

h(K )

Moreover, Q-2  D-1OK , where D :=

pmaxj:p|N(Pj )2kj /e(Pj )  Z.

p|N (P1P2···Ps)

Remark. Assume s  1. Then Lemma 2.2 is vacuous if K is totally real, and otherwise Dirichlet's unit theorem shows that |U | =  unless K is CM. So in its current form, without including bounds on u in other embeddings of K, Lemma 2.2 is useful only if K is CM.

We will apply Lemma 2.2 with K a CM field, with complex conjugation automorphism c : K  K.
Thus all prime ideals P of OK above a rational prime that splits completely in K satisfy P = cP . Also, above such a rational prime there are many Pi in K. Moreover, an element of K has absolute value 1 in some embedding if and only if it has absolute value 1 in all embeddings, so when K is
CM Lemma 2.2 produces elements in U as needed for Lemma 2.1. To keep -1, which will be the D from Lemma 2.2, bounded, we should only take primes Pi above
some fixed set of rational primes. How many and which rational primes should we use? It turns out
not to matter much. One idea, due to Will Sawin after he read GPT's proof, is to use primes Pi above a single rational prime. If we have a sequence of number fields of bounded root discriminant
and growing degree, all split completely above at a given rational prime p, then we can take all
the kj large compared to that bounded root discriminant to obtain u as desired, and completing
4

the argument. That such a sequence exists is an immediate consequence of the Golod-Shafarevich Theorem [15, 16] and Shafarevich's relation bounds for Galois groups of class towers [30, 31] (see, e.g. Koch [21, Theorem 11.5]). Indeed, this kind of consequence of these results is widely used, and indeed much stronger results (such as requiring infinitely many primes splitting completely [20]) are known.
Let S and T be finite disjoint sets of places of Q, with   S. Let GST be the Galois group of the maximal pro-2 extension Q~ of Q, unramified outside T and split completely at all primes in S, a class tower.2 If T consists of odd primes, for a number field L  Q~ , since only primes in T are ramified and they are ramified tamely, | Disc L|  pT p[L:Q], and so such L have bounded root discriminant (which is, by definition | Disc L|1/[L:Q]). Given such an L, we will use K = L(i) as our CM field, and have | Disc K|  pT {2} p2[L:Q]. Let f = deg(L). Then the covolume of OK in the Minkowski embedding of OK in Cf is 2-f | Disc K|.
Proof of Theorem 1.1. Let T be any finite set of odd primes with |T |  6. Then d(GT{}), which is the minimal number or generators of GT{}, is the 2-rank of the maximal abelian elementary abelian quotient of GT{} (i.e. the Frattini quotient). This quotient is the Galois group of LT , the maximal totally real multi-quadratic field unramified outside T , so by the theory of quadratic fields, d(GT{}) is |T | - 1 unless T contains no primes that are 3 mod 4, in which case it is |T | (or see [21, Theorem 11.8]). Then if S is the union of {} and a finite set of primes split completely in LT (i), the group GST is the quotient of GT{} by |S| - 1 relations--the Frobenius elements at the finite places of S. Since these Frobenius elements are trivial in the Frattini quotient, d(GTS ) = d(GT{}), and by [21, Theorems 11.5,11.8] we have a bound on the relation rank,
r(GST )  r(G{T}) + |S| - 1 = d(GT{}) + |S| - 1.
As long as |T | - 1 + |S| - 1  (|T | - 1)2/4, then r(GST )  d(GTS )2/4, and GST is infinite by the GolodShafarevich Theorem [15]. This gives tremendous latitude to pick T and S. For simplicity, we will take |S| = 2, where S = {p, }. As justonesmall example, we can let T = {3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17} and S = {101, }. We have that LT = Q( 5, 13, 17, 21, 33) and that 101 splits completely in LT so d(GST ) = 5, and r(GST )  6 so GTS is infinite. Thus there are number fields Lj of degrees fj   totally real, unramified outside T , such that Lj(i) are CM and split completely at (finite) primes in S. We take Kj = Lj(i). Let r = qT {2} q, which is an upper bound for the root discriminant of any Kj.
Then we apply Lemma 2.2 with all kj = k = 18r3/ - 1 to these fields in the f pairs of complex conjugate primes Pi, PŻi above p. By [7, p. 143, (7)], we have for [K : Q]  4,
hK  | DiscK |.
(Thanks to Chat GPT for help finding a convenient reference. Several different standard arguments can give bounds of the form hK  c1| DiscK |c2 for various constants c1, c2 and the above is not optimal but suffices for the argument.) So we have |U |  (k + 1)fj r-2fj . We have D = p2k.
Then we apply Lemma 2.1 with  = p-2kOKj in its Minkowski embedding obtain a U with u = (k +1)r-2. Note that since any non-zero element of OKj has norm at least 1 and thus has magnitude at least 1 in some complex embedding, we can take  = p-2k. Projection of p-2kOKj onto any coordinate in the Minkowski embedding is injective. We have that covol(p-2kOKj ) = 2-fj 2fj | Disc Kj|.
2We remark that GPT's original argument used the maximal pro-3 extension instead. The reason for this is unclear, but one line of the CoT mentions that there might be "nuisances" for 2-towers that disappear for 3-towers. However, 2-towers are in fact notationally a bit simpler to work with.
5

Since -2(2-fj 2fj | Disc Kj|)1/(fj)  r/2, we let v = r/2. Since, u = 18r3/r-2 > 36v/, this proves Theorem 1.1 as described after the statement of Lemma 2.1.
Explicitly, the exponent in (2.1) can be taken to be

sup
R2

log

uR2 4v2

log

9R2 2

=

1

+

log

u 36v

log

36 2

 1 + 6.24 · 10-38

where v = r/2,   101-218r3/, and u = 18r3/r-2, with r = 2 · 3 · 5 · 7 · 11 · 13 · 17.

(2.2) 

GPT wrote a slightly more difficult argument, taking all kj to be 1 and primes Pi above t rational primes. This requires having an infinite class tower, while controlling the splitting of t rational primes, but keeping the root discriminant small compared to 2t. However, a class tower (with
no splitting conditions) has a Galois group of approximately balanced presentation of dimension
approximately the number of ramified primes allowed in the tower, and it takes quadratically many
relations in terms of generators to make the group finite. Thus, the root discriminant can be a product of  primes that we pick, something like ec log , and we can control the splitting of t
primes, where t can be taken to be quadratic in , and still keep the class tower infinite. This means we can make 2t plenty large compared to any power of the root discriminant, while having
an infinite class tower split at t rational primes. In retrospect, this AI argument was unnecessarily
subtle, because one can take t arbitrarily large with respect to  by Proposition 2.3.

Proposition 2.3 (Cf. [20]). There exists an infinite tower of totally real fields over Q with bounded root discriminant and with infinitely many completely split primes q  1 mod 4.

Proof. Without the condition q  1 mod 4, this would follow from [20, Theorem 2.8 of arXiv version,

or Theorem 4 of published version] with K = Q, S = {3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, }, and p = 2, for instance.

In order to arrange for q  1 mod 4, one can modify the (recursive) proof of [20, loc. cit.] as follows:

Every time the Chebotarev density theorem is applied to obtain a split rational prime q of a number

field F , we instead apply the Chebotarev density theorem to the number field F (i).



2.2. Proofs of Main Lemmas.

Proof of Lemma 2.1. By averaging over a  Cf /, there exists a choice of a such that (R - 1)2 f
|(a + )  BR-1|  covol()1/f .

Fix an injective coordinate projection P of the bounded window W := (a+)BR. The translationby-U argument described before Lemma 2.1 implies that

2(P)  |U||(a + )  BR-1|  uf

(R - 1)2 covol()1/f

f


uR2 f 4v2 ,

since R - 1  R/2. On the other hand,  is -separated in the sup-norm on Cf , so the sumset (Minkowski sum) of W and B/2 has volume  |W ||B/2|, and  |BR+/2|  |B3R/2|. Thus

|P| = |W |  |B3R/2| = |B/2|

9R2 f 2 .



Proof of Lemma 2.2. Use the pigeonhole principle on the classes in Cl(K) of the ideals

s

Pjaj

P

kj j

-aj

,

j=1

6

where 0  aj  kj. Taking ratios of the ideals landing in the most frequent ideal class, gives
 js=1(kj + 1) h(K )
pairwise distinct principal ideals () for which   OK× . Now let u = /  Q-2. Observe that the ideals (u) = (2) are pairwise distinct. Moreover, Q2 | DOK , so Q2  DOK , so Q-2  D-1OK . 
3. Noga Alon
The Erds unit distance problem [14] raised in 1946 is among the best known open problems in Combinatorics. It is also arguably the best known problem in Discrete Geometry. Indeed, its description in the book of Brass, Moser and Pach on Research Problems in Discrete Geometry ([9], Chapter 5) is: "The following problem of Erds [14] is possibly the best known (and simplest to explain) problem in combinatorial geometry: How often can the same distance occur among n points in the plane?"
Let U (n) denote the maximum possible number of unit distances determined by n points in the Euclidean plane. Erds proved that U (n)  n1+(1/ log log n), and the best known upper bound is U (n)  O(n4/3). This was first proved by Spencer, Szemerédi and Trotter [32] in 1984. Several simpler proofs of the same bound up to a constant factor have been given over the years, the shortest and most elegant one is due to Székely [33]. More on the rich history of this problem can be found in [9].
The common belief, conjectured by Erds, has been that U (n)  n1+o(1). This has been one of Erds' favorite problems, I have heard him myself mentioning the problem multiple times in his lectures. I believe it would be fair to say that every mathematician working in Combinatorial Geometry thought about this problem, and lots of mathematicians working in other areas spent at least some time thinking about it.
Let me also add that although this problem may look at first as a recreational one this is not the case, it is in fact closely related to other mathematical areas including Number Theory and Algebraic Geometry.
The solution of the problem by the internal model of Open AI is, in my opinion, an outstanding achievement, settling a long-standing open problem. The fact that the correct answer is not n1+o(1) is surprising, and the construction and its analysis apply fairly sophisticated tools from algebraic number theory in an elegant and clever way. As explained by the remarks of some of my colleagues here there are several reasons that explain why AI tools can be better than humans in finding such a construction. With or without a full agreement with these reasons, the fact is that the AI was able to do here what lots of excellent human researchers tried and failed to do.
Like other mathematicians who had the opportunity to experiment, even if only briefly in my case, with ChatGPT Pro 5.5, my impression has been that AI tools are capable of changing research in mathematics in a dramatic way. The new spectacular solution of the Erds unit distance problem convinces me that it is hard to overestimate the full potential impact of this change.
4. Thomas Bloom
This was one of Erds' favourite problems ­ he first asked it in 1946 [14] and returned to it many times. (The site www.erdosproblems.com, on which it is Problem #90, currently lists 14 separate references, and there are no doubt more.) The influential collection of `Research Problems in Discrete Geometry' by Brass, Moser, and Pach [8] describes it as `possibly the best known (and simplest to explain) problem in combinatorial geometry'. For an AI to produce a solution to a problem of this calibre is both surprising and impressive.
7

One rough way to quantify the interest which Erds himself had in his problems is by the prize value attached to them. He first offered a monetary reward in 1982 [11], of $300, for a proof or disproof of the upper bound n1+o(1). Interestingly, he wrote in [12] that the upper bound of n1+o(1) would be `very difficult to prove' if true; certainly Erds had seen many surprising constructions that he had missed at this point, and perhaps saw the possibility that he was also missing something here. The first time the higher prize of $500 was offered in print appears to be 1995 [13]. He was quite clear here that either a proof or disproof of the upper bound  n1+o(1) would qualify, so we can unambiguously say that the AI has solved a $500 Erds problem.
Erds was consistent in his belief that the upper bound of n1+o(1) was true; no doubt he was encouraged as the decades went by without anyone improving on his original lattice based construction. As a result, it is likely that the most of the human efforts spent on this problem have been on trying to prove the upper bound, rather than spending serious time on trying to disprove it.
Perhaps tempting fate, on 16th April I included this problem in a blog post on www.erdosproblems. com titled (somewhat tongue in cheek) `Top 10 Erds Problems'. I wrote this list as a response to some of the discourse around existing AI solutions to several other, much easier, Erds problems, which had prompted some people to wrongly assume that all of Erds' problems were inconsequential trivialities that had only remained unsolved because nobody had tried to prove them. This is very much not the case ­ many of Erds' problems have been intensively studied for decades, and been extremely fruitful in the depth and complexity of the techniques that have been created in attempts to solve them.
The unit distance problem was the only problem from discrete geometry I included; the distinct distance problem was also a strong contender, but since this has been (almost) completely solved by Guth and Katz, the unit distance problem was a better example of a still open yet natural question that has resisted proof for decades.
While I believed that AI would make some progress on at least a couple of the problems in that list eventually, I did not expect this to happen just one month later!
If the result of this paper was a proof of the unit distance problem, that would be truly incredible. While I was still very surprised to hear of the this result, this was dampened slightly when I learnt it was a construction of a counterexample, and still further when I learnt that nature of the construction, being (with the benefit of hindsight) a natural, albeit highly non-trivial, generalisation of the original lattice-based construction of Erds.
On examining the construction, it becomes more clear how people had missed this before ­ it requires the confluence of several different unlikely events: that a good mathematician is
(1) spending significant time in thinking about the unit distance conjecture in the first place; (2) seriously trying to disprove it, despite the oft-repeated belief of Erds that it is true; (3) believes that there is mileage in generalising the original construction to other number fields,
and so is willing to expend significant time in exploring such constructions3; and (4) sufficiently familiar with the relevant parts of class field theory to recognise that the appro-
priately phrased question about infinite towers of number fields with appropriate parameters can be solved using existing theory.
The AI met all of these criteria, and its success here echoes previous achievements: it often produces the most surprising results by persevering down paths that a human may have dismissed as not worth their time to explore, combining superhuman levels of patience with familiarity with a vast array of technical machinery.
When assessing the importance and influence of an AI-generated proof, a question I ask myself is: has this taught us something new about the problem? Do we understand discrete geometry
3See the remarks of Will Sawin and Jacob Tsimerman in this paper for a discussion of how one might have started along such a path, but dismissed such an approach as `this can never work'.
8

better now? I think the answer is a moderated yes: this shows that there is a lot more that number theoretic constructions have to say about these sorts of questions than we suspected; moreover, that the number theory required can be very deep. No doubt many algebraic number theorists will be taking a close look at other open problems in discrete geometry in the coming months.
On the other hand, perhaps some in the area will be a little disappointed with how little this tells us: it does not introduce any powerful new geometric tools, or hitherto unsuspected structural results, that a proof of the unit distance conjecture would likely have called for. Still, while perhaps not the proof of a conjecture that we had hoped for, no doubt this construction and the ideas involved will have a major impact in discrete geometry.
One aspect of this proof should not be overlooked: while the original proof produced by AI was completely valid, it was significantly improved by the human researchers at OpenAI and the many other mathematicians involved in the present paper. The human still plays a vital role in discussing, digesting, and improving this proof, and exploring its consequences.
The frontiers of knowledge are very spiky, and no doubt the coming months and years will see similar successes in many other areas of mathematics, where long-standing open problems are resolved by an AI revealing unexpected connections and pushing the existing technical machinery to its limit. AI is helping us to more fully explore the cathedral of mathematics we have build over the centuries; what other unseen wonders are waiting in the wings?
5. W T Gowers
I do not have the background in algebraic number theory to make a detailed assessment of the disproof of Erds's unit-distance conjecture, so instead I shall make some tentative comments about what it tells us about the current capabilities of AI.
My experience of learning about the solution was an interesting one. I heard about it from Sébastien Bubeck during a Zoom call, but misunderstood what he was saying and thought that the model had proved an upper bound of n1+o(1). The Zoom call took place in the late afternoon and I spent the evening adjusting my world view: if AI could come up with a proof like that, then maybe it would be all over for mathematicians very soon. The next morning I and the other authors of this paper received an email about the result, and only then did I understand that it had disproved the conjecture rather than proving it, which came as a big relief. It is interesting to reflect on why it should have been a relief, since either way this is the first example of a famous (in my mathematical circles at least) open problem being solved by AI with no human intervention once it had been trained and then given the problem to solve.
The short answer is that, without knowing anything about the solution, I could more easily imagine a model coming up with a counterexample while still lacking some essential mathematical capabilities than imagine it coming up with a proof. The breakthrough of Larry Guth and Nets Katz that solved the closely related Erds distance problem introduced new and unexpected tools into combinatorial geometry that led to the solutions of many further problems. However, the unit distance conjecture continued to resist (for reasons we now understand!), so appeared to require a further major idea. It was exactly that ­ a major new idea ­ that would have been disturbing. A counterexample, on the other hand, was something one could imagine a computer coming up with by trying lots of things and at some point getting lucky, without needing "deep insight". To be clear, I am not saying that that is what actually happened ­ just that it was possible to imagine that it had happened.
Now that I have seen the solution and seen some of the reactions to it by people who understand it in detail, I find myself not only trying to assess what AI has achieved in this particular case, but also thinking more generally about how such assessments can possibly be made. Can we still identify some mathematical capability that human mathematicians have and AI does not yet have? If so, what might that capability be, and how could one go about demonstrating that AI still lacks it?
9

Almost certainly the answer to the first question will have to be quantitative rather than qualitative. That is, we are unlikely to be able to show that there is something we can do that current AI models cannot in principle do at all, but we might be able to show that there are things we can still do much more efficiently than those models. But when a model has just solved a major open problem, it is clear that even a modest conclusion like that will not be straightforward to demonstrate, and indeed isn't obviously true.
I run a group in automatic theorem proving at Cambridge, and one of our activities has been to try to understand what it is for a mathematics problem to be difficult. An informal idea that has come up in discussions with Jacob Loader, Marco dos Santos and Anand Tadipatri is something that one might call "Kolmogorov complexity modulo experts". The rough idea is to consider the difficulty of a proof to be the length of the shortest sequence of bits that would provide experts with enough hints to reconstruct the proof. It isn't quite as simple as that, since an expert can always do without a k-bit hint by doing a brute-force search through all k-bit sequences. However, one can get round that objection by adjusting the measure to something like 2k + t, where k is the length of the "hint sequence" and t is the time needed to reconstruct the proof. Even this is not perfect, since it ignores the time it takes to explore the tree of potential hint sequences, but one can adjust for that too. Another objection is that some hints may be short but very surprising: there are proofs that take a long time to be discovered because although they are simple, they involve ideas that have "no right to work" or that come from very different areas of mathematics. Again, one can modify the measure to take this phenomenon into account.
For the purposes of this discussion I shall assume that such difficulties have been ironed out, and I shall refer to the "complexity" of a proof to be some suitably developed notion of Kolmogorov complexity modulo experts. The following questions then arise naturally: are human mathematicians still able to find proofs with a larger complexity than AI is capable of finding, and what is the complexity of the solution that has just been discovered to the Erds unit distance problem?
For the moment, I'd like to imagine a hint sequence as something like a multi-part question on a question sheet, designed to help a suitably expert mathematician work through the proof by reducing it to a sequence of exercises. The first part of such a hint sequence might be something like this.
(i) Look for a counterexample
When assessing the "length" of this hint, one should imagine how it might be efficiently encoded. For this purpose, one could imagine having the help of a "hint book", in which bit sequences are translated into hints. The hints in such a book would be rather generic, and the book would be designed in such a way that hints that are frequently useful would have short encodings. In such a book, the two length-1 sequences (0) and (1) might might well encode "look for a counterexample" and "look for a proof", respectively, in which case this would be a one-bit hint. However, this example also demonstrates the need to take surprisal into account. For instance, I have myself thought a small amount about the unit-distance problem, but it never occurred to me to try to disprove it. Somehow I was too convinced by a story that turned out to be incorrect: that the distinct-distances conjecture follows from the unit-distance conjecture, which doesn't have an obvious counterexample, and the distinct-distance conjecture has now been proved, so it is likely that eventually the unitdistance conjecture will be proved too. As a result, my subjective probability that the conjecture was false was quite low, which I believe was the commonly held view, making the hint particularly useful. Thus, the value of the one bit of information should be taken as greater than 1 in order to reflect the considerable updating of one's perception of the problem once one has obtained it.
A second hint might be this.
(ii) Take the best known construction and generalize it.
10

In the hypothetical hint book, highly generic and frequently applied moves like these would pre-

sumably have very short encodings. I also think this hint would be sufficient for a mathematician to

make significant inroads into the proof. The standard construction, due to Erds, is a square grid of size n × n. Since one is talking about distances between points, it becomes very natural to

think of the elements of this grid as Gaussian integers, and once one does that, one has an algebraic

structure that can be generalized.

To extract the most possible from this example, one looks for an integer m  n that can be

written as a sum of two squares in as many ways as possible, since this will give rise to many distances equal to m (and afterwards one can of course normalize by dividing by m). This one

can do by taking m to have many prime factors congruent to 1 mod 4, and the result is a lower

bound for the unit-distance problem of n1+c/ log log n.



We can look at the construction as follows: the circle of radius m contains a large set U of

Gaussian integers, and a n × n grid of Gaussian integers has many differences that belong to

U . Without the need for a further hint, it is natural to try to generalize this by taking another

ring of integers that resembles the Gaussian integers, and that leads quite quickly to the idea that

ChatGPT sets out: to replace the ring Z by the ring of integers in a totally real field L and to

replace Q(i) by L(i).

At this stage in the proof-discovery process, one needs to "drop a level" and start considering

more detailed calculations about the properties that L will need to have. Here I must leave it to

somebody else to suggest where the difficulties would arise for an expert who has decided to pursue

this line of attack, and what a minimal set of hints might be that would enable such an expert to

complete the proof. That is not very easy to assess because of the time/hint tradeoff mentioned

earlier, not to mention a multitude of psychological factors such as the degree of motivation of the

expert in question. However, I asked Will Sawin, who suggested to me that the following hint would

have been helpful to make substantial further progress, though probably not sufficient to reduce

generating the rest of the proof to an exercise. (Of course, that depends on what counts as an

exercise, which is itself not very easy to make precise.)

(iii) Try a sequence of number fields of increasing degree, but work with prime ideals of bounded norm.

As written, this hint is not so generic, but in context it is more so, since by this stage number fields are already part of the picture, which should allow for considerable compression. For example, maybe the first half of the hint could be something like, "Replace what you were previously trying to prove by a non-uniform version."
Even if more hints are still needed, my impression is that the total length, even taking surprisal into account, is fairly short. Many of the ideas needed for the proof were present in the literature already, and for such ideas either no hint is needed, since the expert is aware of that piece of literature, or a highly generic "look it up" hint would be enough.
Clearly I am speculating wildly, but my hunch is that the hint sequence that would have been necessary to guide an expert to Guth and Katz's proof of the Erds distinct-distances conjecture would have been quite a bit longer, because that proof involved several surprising ideas with non-obvious connections to the problem. If that hunch is correct, it would provide some kind of justification for my relief that this result was a disproof rather than a proof. Perhaps what we are seeing at the moment is not that AI is about to overtake human mathematicians, but rather that there are certain styles of problem where it has a distinct advantage. It has an encyclopaedic knowledge of mathematics, and it does not have to worry nearly as much as we do about time management, so it is good at finding surprising connections, and it can afford to try quite hard to prove statements
11

that seem unlikely to be true ­ provided, in both cases, that the complexity of the proofs it finds is not too high.
Is there any reason to suppose that a conclusion like this is correct? More to the point, if it is correct now, is there any reason to suppose that it will remain correct in, say, two years' time? The only way I can see that happening is if AI is for some fundamental reason exploring "hint space" in a much less efficient way than we do. I don't see any obvious signs of that from its chain of thought, but it could perhaps be that a lot of additional "actual thought" is going on behind each step of what it presents as its chain of thought. My current bet is that progress in AI mathematics is not about to reach a plateau, and that we will soon see AI solutions to many problems that we will find hard to explain away as easier than expected with hindsight. (Here I am assuming that there will at least be the usual kinds of efficiency gains, where what a large model can do this year, a much smaller one can do next year. Without that, solving lots of problems might be too expensive, not to mention environmentally unfriendly.)
In any case, there is no doubt that the solution to the unit-distance problem is a milestone in AI mathematics: if a human had written the paper and submitted it to the Annals of Mathematics and I had been asked for a quick opinion, I would have recommended acceptance without any hesitation. No previous AI-generated proof has come close to that. Furthermore, even if it is correct that AI cannot yet find a proof that needs a long hint sequence, such proofs are very difficult to find for humans as well, so in the unlikely event that progress in AI mathematics does suddenly stall, we have still probably entered an era where it will become very difficult for humans to compete with AI at solving mathematical problems.4
6. Daniel Litt
Before hearing about its solution, I had little experience with the unit distance problem--I had seen it on erdosproblems.com and was aware of the statement but knew little about the history of the problem. After an internal model at OpenAI produced a solution, I was asked to check its correctness by Mark Sellke and Mehtaab Sawhney at OpenAI, with the idea that I had some familiarity with the algebraic number theory being used, particularly around Golod-Shafarevich's construction of infinite class field towers. It did not take long for me to convince myself that the solution was correct, not to mention quite clever and natural. I spent a fair amount of time the following weekend nerd-sniped into thinking about various possible optimizations and variants, though I think these have now been subsumed by the ideas explained by others in this paper.
This is the first example of a result produced autonomously by an AI that I find exciting in itself, as opposed to as a leading indicator. That said, the mathematical context is quite far from my expertise and I will leave others better-qualified than me to comment further on the solution and its interest. Instead, I will speculate briefly about what it tells us about the human practice of mathematics.
There are a few examples of relatively well-known open problems resolved via a fairly short, clever argument: famously, the finite field Kakeya conjecture, proven by Dvir; the sensitivity conjecture, proven by Huang; and a few others. Arguably, this solution to the unit distance problem has the same flavor. My sense is that such examples are historically relatively rare, though I suspect we are about to find out about quite a few more. What explains the existence of such problems? How common are they? It seems to me that the near-term future of research mathematics revolves to some extent around the answers to these questions.
4I chose my words carefully there, since solving problems is not all that mathematicians do. My guess is that AI will soon reach a high level at other activities such as building theories, formulating definitions and asking interesting questions, but that is a separate discussion.
12

One possible explanation for such low-hanging fruit: those working on the problem have anchored onto a non-optimal approach or belief about the truth (for example, in this case, that Erds's conjecture on the topic was true). Another: the solution requires ideas from areas with which most of those working on the problem are unfamiliar. These explanations, if correct, should cause us some discomfort. They suggest that incentives towards specialization and silo-ing, though understandable, have cost us some high-quality science.
In my own area--algebraic and arithmetic geometry--there are simply very few practitioners, and so arguably all problems are attention-bottlenecked. On the other hand, my sense is that it is unusual for well-known open problems to have answers accessible to clever argument, as opposed to new theory. Many of us work on programs, rather than problems (though I personally count myself as a problem-solver). It will be interesting to see how AI impacts these areas; the impact thus far has been minimal, though I expect this state of affairs will not last long.
Finally, it is illuminating to contrast the most productive current approach to doing mathematics by AI to the way humans mathematicians work. At any given time a human will, driven by their personal curiosity, choose a small number of questions and try to understand them deeply. By contrast, the best autonomous AI mathematics has been produced by trawling through entire problem lists and solving some portion of the listed problems. This is a vast expansion of the attention aimed at mathematical problems, and perhaps will serve to better focus future human attention and curiosity.

7. Will Sawin

I find it difficult to summarize my overall impressions, which would in any case overlap with

the points raised by other mathematicians, so instead I will make two somewhat disconnected

observations:

Let me first explain a subtlety that likely made it more difficult for mathematicians working on

the problem to discover this argument: Erds's original lower bound, using a set of lattice points,

may be interpreted as taking points of absolute value bounded by a large parameter in the ring of

integers Z[i] of the imaginary quadratic field Q(i). In trying to generalize this, the most natural approach is to take points of absolute value bounded

by a large parameter in the ring of integers OK of some fixed CM field K. On the other hand, OpenAI's internal model's approach was to take a set of points of absolute value bounded by a fixed

parameter in the ring of integers OK of a CM field K of increasing degree. Getting from the first approach to the second approach would be much more intuitive if the bounds obtained from the

first approach grew with the degree of the field K. However, they do not, for the following reason:

If one normalizes the set so that unit distances come from elements of OF of norm an element 
whose ideal () is a product of small split primes, which for simplicity we will take to be P S P for some set S of primes of OF , then the number of such  will be 2#S times a factor coming from the class group and we will need to take the absolute value to be bounded by P S N P 1/2d which means the set of points has size proportional to P S N P , where N P = #(OK/P ) is the norm of P . (We could take k'th powers of some primes for k > 1, but this does not significantly affect

the asymptotics in this setting.) We want to maximize P S P while minimizing P S N P while

ensuring all primes P in S split in K, which is done by taking S to be the set of prime ideals of OF

split in OK that have norm < X.

Having

done

this,

the

prime

number

theorem

for

prime

ideals

gives

that

#S

=

(1

+

o(1))

2

X log

X

and P S P = e(1+o(1)X , which exactly recovers Erds's lower bound. Thus, there is no indication

that the choice of field matters. One could examine the lower-order terms in the prime number

theorem, but for X large the dominant terms come from the zeroes of the Dedekind zeta function of K, and these terms, of size X1/2, are greater than the terms arising from the class number. There

13

is no apparent reason one field would be better-behaved than another field for this, as each zero

gives oscillatory contributions that give better bounds for some X and worse bounds for other X,

and thus no reason to try a sequence of fields.

Let me now explain the potential to generalize this approach to two other, related questions

in combinatorial geometry: The distinct distances problem, and the unit distances problem in

dimension 3. In both cases, there are serious obstacles to any possible generalization.

The distinct distances problem asks for the minimum number of distinct distances between a set

of n distinct points in the plane. The distinct distance problem and the unit distance problem are

related, in that by the pigeonhole principle, a set of n points which contains pairs of points at only

m distances must have some at least n(n - 1)/m pairs of points of distance d for at least one d, and

then dividing by d we get a set of points with n(n - 1)/m pairs of points at unit distance. However,

it is much harder to upper bound the number of distinct distances than to lower bound the number

of pairs of points at unit distance. In fact, Guth and Katz proved [18] a lower bound of the form

n/ log n for the number of distinct distances represented by n points n the plane, which differs from Erds's upper bound by a facto of only log n.

There is a natural approach to the distinct distance problem using number fields. Given a CM

field K with totally real subfield F value, in each complex embedding,

of is

degree d, we can take a at most R. One expects

sreotuogfhlpyoi(ntRs 2in)d/OKwKhosusechabpsooilnuttse,

and the squared distance between any two such points is a totally positive element of OF whose

absolute value in of OF with these

each real properties

eims broeudgdhinlyg,(4isRa2t)dm/ost F4.RH2,oawnedveor,nenoetxpalelcetslemtheentnsuomfbOerF

of elements can be the

squared length: Just as a positive integer cannot be the squared length of a vector in the standard

lattice, i.e. a sum of two squares, if it is divisible, with odd multiplicity, by a prime congruent to

3 modulo 4, an element of OF cannot be the squared length of an element of OK if it is divisible,

with odd multiplicity, by a prime ideal of OF inert in OK. For each prime P of OF , the proportion

of

elements

of

OF

which

P

divides

to

odd

multiplicity

is

1 1+N P

-1

.

Hence, if we construct OF to have a set S of small primes that remain inert in OK, and we

assume the primes behave independently, we will get a number of distinct distances that is roughly

(4R2)d F

 P S

1 1+N P

-1

.

To get a nontrivial bound, the factor

P S(1 + N P -1) must be better than

(4/)d K . This is much more difficult than the unit distance problem, since the quantity to beat

F

is similar, growing exponentially in d for fields of bounded root discriminant, but the quantity that

must beat it is much smaller, getting a factor of 1 + N P -1 for each prime instead of P . If we could

somehow ensure that k/ log k primes of Q split completely in F and are inert in K, the best case scenario is that these are the first k/ log k primes, which by the prime number theorem are roughly the primes < k. Then P S(1 + N P -1) would be p<k(1 + p-1)d = ed(log log k+O(1)) by Mertens'

theorem. However, to obtain these split primes by Golod-Shafarevich, we would need k/ log k

ramified primes, which would make the discriminant exponentially large in d k/ log k, and thus
much larger than ed(log log k+O(1)). The unit distance problem in R3 asks for the maximum number of pairs of points at unit distance
in a set of points in R3. The points in a ball of radius n1/3 in Z3 have squared distances O(n2/3) and thus some squared distance must arise from at least n · n/n2/3 = n4/3 pairs of points. More

precisely, the number of times a given squared distance m arises is proportional to the number

of representations of m as a sum of three squares. It follows from the class number formula that the number of representations of m as a sum of three squares is m times a bounded value times

L(1, m). Walfisz [37] showed that L(1, m) can be larger than log log m infinitely often (which is sharp under the generalized Riemann hypothesis, as shown by Littlewood [26]). It follows that some squared distance can arise from at least a constant times n4/3 log log n pairs of points.

14

Again, there is a natural approach by number fields. Given a totally real field F of degree d

and a positive definite quadratic form Q in three variables over OF , one can embed OF3 into R3 in

such a in OF3

way that of length

the squared length of a bounded by R in each

vector v  OF3 is real embedding,

given by Q(v). Taking the one expects roughly R3d(

set of vectors

N

 Q F

3)

such vectors, where we drop factors that are exponential

number squared

odfisptoasnscibeleissqoubatareindeddisRta4nd/ce(Ns obQtainedF

from pairs 5) times.

in d independent of F of such vectors is (R2d
However, the number

for simplicity. The / F , so a typical of pairs of vectors

with squared distance  is proportional to the number of representations of  by the quadratic

form Q. Now Siegel's mass formula shows that, when we average over quadratic forms Q with

a given R4dL(1,

discrQim)/i(n(aNnt, Qt)h1e/3averFag5 )e.

number

For this to be better than n4/3, we must

of representations is an have L(1, Q) greater

exponential factor in than (N Q)1/3F .

d times We may

express L(1, Q) as a conditionally convergent Euler product with a factor of

1

1-

1 NP

for each

prime P of OF split in F (

Q) and a factor of

1

1+

1 NP

for each prime P

of OF

inert in F (

Q),

so the situation is similar to the distinct distances problem, except worse as we also have to contend

with the factors at the inert primes.

8. Arul Shankar
I had not encountered this problem before seeing the proof from OpenAI, and I found the proof to be a clean execution of a very beautiful idea and quite well written up. This impressive proof is (loosely speaking) a generalization of Erdos' original lower bound. In his proof, Erdos took elements in Z[i] of bounded absolute value, and used these to construct algebraic numbers of absolute value 1 with bounded denominators. Then the bound goes to infinity, essentially by expanding the set of integer primes allowed to contribute to the elements in Z[i]. This new proof changes this paradigm quite a bit. First, instead of fixing the field and varying the integer primes, the set of integer primes is fixed and the field is varied. Second, rather than taking a family of fixed degree fields to vary over, the new proof uses a class field tower of fields.
The first change of perspective is familiar in some fields of number theory, especially arithmetic statistics. For example, it is common to study a complementary question to the Chebotarev density theorem, where instead of fixing a field and counting the number of (bounded norm) primes that split completely, we fix a prime and count the number of fields (of bounded height) in a family in which the prime splits completely. The second paradigm shift is significantly less common, especially, as pointed out previously, in "fixed dimension" settings. All the same, I would consider this to be a very "human" proof, though a extremely ingenious one.
The model's CoT is deeply interesting. It is noteworthy that a significant majority of the thoughts are trying to construct a counterexample to the widely believed upper bound, rather than trying to prove it. This argues that the model has some combination of good intuition, willingness to try approaches considered long-shot by the community, and a predisposition to attempt constructions.
The CoT showed the model trying out a vast array of ideas from a wide range of mathematics for the required construction. The model went through ideas pretty quickly, but when it reached the crucial idea (in the paragraph starting with "Suppose optimistically that..."), it honed in on the proof quite methodically.
In my opinion this paper demonstrates that current AI models go beyond just helpers to human mathematicians ­ they are capable of having original ingenious ideas, and then carrying them out to fruition.
15

9. Jacob Tsimerman
This is a really impressive piece of work, and I would accept it for any journal without hesitation. I actually briefly worked on this problem and tried to make a counterexample, but failed to make progress.
On Boris Alexeev's suggestion, I thought about this problem with the idea of making a counterexample stemming from a varying family of bounded degree number fields. Increasing degree occured to me, but is a very scary dynamic and often doesn't work out. Moreover, it is hard to think through the analytic regimes and retain guiding intuition - it consumes much time and frequently doesn't work out. While it's true in the final solution that nothing is all that surprising, there are many ways to attempt to set this construction up (how big are the primes? How big is the ball? Do you take large products? how much splitting does one insist on - this is a tradeoff with how easy it is to make the field). It is definitely an intimidating construction to see through even if you know what is going on, and even harder to go play for yourself. It's always tempting to look at a completed proof and declare it obvious after the fact.
This may indicate one way that AI systems have an edge: it's not just that they can try all known methods, but they can play for longer and in more treacherous waters than mathematicians without getting overwhelmed. Of course this is not yet robustly true, but this may be a foreshadowing event.
10. Victor Wang
My previous exposure to this topic came from some beautiful lectures over ten years ago by Larry Guth, on the distinct distances problem, and by Po-Shen Loh, on the unit distance problem. They focused on the geometric and combinatorial aspects of these problems. I have not thought much about the problems since, but recently I enjoyed hearing about [2] from Noga Alon. Only now have I begun to really appreciate the role number theory has to play for special metrics, such as the present 2-norm on R2, and more generally the k-norm on Rs where s, k  2 are integers.
The case s = k is particularly interesting to me. Here the unit distance problem, specialized to scalar multiples of integer boxes [-B, B]k, is essentially equivalent to the study of the HardyLittlewood Hypothesis K for k-fold sums of kth powers of nonnegative integers. If rk(n) denotes the number of ways to write an integer n  1 as such a sum of powers, then r2(n)  O(no(1)), but this is no longer true for r3(n) (Mahler), and it represents a tantalizing open question for k  4; see https://www.erdosproblems.com/322 and http://thomasbloom.org/notes/hypothesisk. html for details. Meanwhile, the distinct distances problem, specialized to [-B, B]k, is essentially equivalent to asking how many integers of size O(Bk) can be written as a sum of k nonnegative kth powers. This is a difficult open question for k  3, lacking the multiplicative structure present for k = 2; see the recent survey [29] for details in the case k = 3.
Sequences of objects of increasing degree have proven decisive in many problems over finite fields (and function fields) in general, and over number fields in Iwasawa theory and elsewhere. Their role in combinatorics also has precedent. The new unit-distance construction is a reminder of the power of this idea, making use of high-dimensional multiplicative number theory in high-degree fields.
The fact that a complete argument can be given in a few pages (assuming background in algebraic number theory at the level of a first or second semester graduate course), as in the present remarks, made the verification process relatively smooth. Had the final digested argument been a bit longer, the process may have been trickier, as participants may have been less willing to invest time in checking details. It will be interesting to see how formalization progresses alongside AI.
The implicit social contract between mathematicians and AI companies deserves further attention. When Hajir, Maire, and Ramakrishna wrote their beautiful papers [19, 20], did they have in mind that an AI might eventually use their work (as the CoT likely indicates) to derive headline results,
16

potentially with significant ensuing financial implications? When we make our work freely available on the arXiv, do we all implicitly want it to be freely available to AI as well?
I do not want to comment further on the trajectory of AI, which seems to me to be a complicated question involving physics, materials, society, and the environment.
11. Melanie Matchett Wood
I had not heard of this problem before hearing of the solution from Open AI. I find the argument to be a beautiful application of number theory to a natural, concrete question.
It is easy to jump to hasty conclusions, but what we can learn about humans, AI, and mathematics from this development is somewhat subtle. I believe if the level and type of human expertise that is represented on this note had been assembled to find a counterexample to this conjecture a month ago, and those people put in similar amounts of time working on it than they did to reading and thinking about Chat GPT's solution, the mathematicians would have found a counterexample. However, without the claimed proof by Chat GPT, there is no particular reason anyone would have tried to look for a counterexample, assembled a group of experts with the appropriate expertise, or that the experts would have agreed to turn their attention to this problem. We can all be reminded by this development of how frequently interesting and powerful things happen mathematically when one applies ideas from one field to another, and think about how AI can help us find more cross-field applications.
This result does not show us all the times AI has claimed to have a proof of something and been wrong. Without that context (which many of us have just from personal experience), it is also easy to draw incorrect conclusions about the current state of AI and research mathematics. In many cases, it will be easier for AI to convince humans it has a proof than to come up with a correct mathematical argument, and I believe that we as mathematicians are not sufficiently prepared for this.
One other concern that directly arises in this development is that there is a history of closely related ideas in the literature, some of which are mentioned above, but which are not appropriately referenced in Chat GPT's paper. If a human came up with this argument and didn't cite such previous work, we would assume that they were unfamiliar with the previous work and came up with the ideas independently, since our professional norms require us to cite previous work whose ideas influenced our work. On the other hand, Chat GPT is in some sense "familiar" with all the previous work. In the future we can expect humans to write many papers that include ideas suggested by AI. Mathematicians need to think about what best practices and proper citation is in these kind of situations, and come to a common understanding as a community.
Properly contextualized, we can see from this and other developments that AI will play an increasingly important role in research mathematics. As a mathematics community, we urgently need to plan for how we can keep our work rigorous and correct, properly acknowledge the influence of previous ideas, and preserve a high level of human understanding of mathematics as we move forward in our use of AI as part of process of research mathematics.
References
[1] Shabnam Akhtari, Jeffrey D. Vaaler, and Martin Widmer, Effective equidistribution of norm one elements in CM-fields, arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.10387, to appear in Annali della Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa, Classe di Scienze (2025). 2
[2] Noga Alon, Matija Buci, and Lisa Sauermann, Unit and distinct distances in typical norms, Geom. Funct. Anal. 35 (2025), 1­42. 1, 16
[3] Marcus Appleby, Steven Flammia, Gary McConnell, and Jon Yard, Generating ray class fields of real quadratic fields via complex equiangular lines, Acta Arithmetica 192 (2020), 211­233. 2
[4] Victor V. Batyrev and Yuri Tschinkel, Manin's conjecture for toric varieties, J. Algebraic Geom. 7 (1998), 15­53. 2 17

[5] Mikhail Belolipetsky and Alexander Lubotzky, Manifolds counting and class field towers, Advances in Mathe-

matics 229 (2012), 3123­3146. 2

[6] Thomas F. Bloom, Erds problem #90, https://www.erdosproblems.com/90, 2026, Accessed 2026-05-09. 1

[7] Armand Borel and Gopal Prasad, Finiteness theorems for discrete subgroups of bounded covolume in semi-simple

groups, Publications Math'ematiques de l'IH'ES 69 (1989), 119­171. 5

[8] Peter Brass, William Moser, and János Pach, Research problems in discrete geometry, Springer, New York, 2005.

7

[9] Peter Brass, William O. J. Moser, and János Pach, Research problems in discrete geometry, Springer, New York,

2005. 7

[10] Jordan S. Ellenberg and Akshay Venkatesh, Reflection principles and bounds for class group torsion, International

Mathematics Research Notices 2007 (2007), Art. ID rnm002, 18 pp. 2, 3

[11] Paul Erds, Some of my favourite problems which recently have been solved, Proceedings of the International

Mathematical Conference, Singapore 1981 (Singapore, 1981), North-Holland Math. Stud., vol. 74, North-Holland,

Amsterdam-New York, 1982, pp. 59­79. 8

[12] Paul Erds, Some of my favourite unsolved problems, A tribute to Paul Erds (1990), 467­478. 8

[13] Paul Erds, Some of my favourite problems in number theory, combinatorics, and geometry, Resenhas 2 (1995),

165­186, Combinatorics Week (Portuguese) (SĂo Paulo, 1994). 8

[14] Paul Erds, On sets of distances of n points, American Mathematical Monthly 53 (1946), 248­250. 1, 7

[15] E. S. Golod and I. R. Shafarevich, On the class field tower, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 28 (1964), 261­272

(Russian), English translation: Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. (2) 48 (1965), 91­102. 5

[16] E. S. Golod and I. R. Shafarevich, On class field towers, Fourteen Papers on Logic, Algebra, Complex Variables

and Topology, American Mathematical Society Translations, Series 2, vol. 48, American Mathematical Society,

Providence, RI, 1965, English translation of the 1964 Russian paper, pp. 91­102. 5

[17] Venkatesan Guruswami, Constructions of codes from number fields, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory

49 (2003), 594­603. 2

[18] Larry Guth and Nets Hawk Katz, On the Erds distinct distances problem in the plane, Annals of Mathematics

181 (2015), 155­190. 14

[19] Farshid Hajir and Christian Maire, Asymptotically good towers of global fields, European Congress of Math-

ematics, Vol. II (Barcelona, 2000) (Carles Casacuberta, Rosa Maria Miró-Roig, Joan Verdera, and Sebastiŕ

Xambó-Descamps, eds.), Progress in Mathematics, vol. 202, Birkhäuser, Basel, 2001, pp. 207­218. 16

[20] Farshid Hajir, Christian Maire, and Ravi Ramakrishna, Cutting towers of number fields, Annales Mathématiques

du Québec 45 (2021), 321­345. 2, 3, 5, 6, 16

[21] Helmut Koch, Galois theory of p-extensions, Springer Monographs in Mathematics, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,

2002. 5

[22] Gene S. Kopp, SIC-POVMs and the Stark conjectures, International Mathematics Research Notices (2021),

13812­13838. 2

[23] Jr. Lenstra, H. W., Codes from algebraic number fields, Mathematics and Computer Science, II, CWI Mono-

graphs, vol. 4, North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1986, Proceedings of the conference held in Amster-

dam, 1986, pp. 95­104. 2

[24] Xue-Bin Liang, The q-ary gilbert-varshamov bound can be improved for all but finitely many positive integers q,

2024, Preprint. 2

[25] S. N. Litsyn and M. A. Tsfasman, Constructive high-dimensional sphere packings, Duke Mathematical Journal

54 (1987), 147­161. 2



[26] J. E. Littlewood, On the class-number of the corpus p( -k), Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society

s2-27 (1928), 358­372. 14

[27] Laura Luzzi, Roope Vehkalahti, and Cong Ling, Almost universal codes for MIMO wiretap channels, IEEE

Transactions on Information Theory 64 (2018), 7218­7241. 2

[28] Christian Maire and Frédérique Oggier, Maximal order codes over number fields, Journal of Pure and Applied

Algebra 222 (2018), 1827­1858. 2

[29] James Maynard, Sums of three positive cubes, Journal of the London Mathematical Society 113 (2026), e70554.

16

[30] Igor R. Shafarevich, Extensions ŕ points de ramification donnés (en russe), Publications Mathématiques de

l'IHÉS 18 (1963), 71­92 (Russian). 5

[31] Igor R. Shafarevich, Extensions with given points of ramification, American Mathematical Society Translations,

Series 2 59 (1966), 128­149, English translation by J. W. S. Cassels; title also cited as "Extensions with prescribed

ramification points". 5

18

[32] Joel H. Spencer, Endre Szemerédi, and William T. Trotter, Unit distances in the euclidean plane, Graph Theory and Combinatorics (Béla Bollobás, ed.), Academic Press, London, 1984, Proceedings of the Cambridge Conference, 1983, pp. 293­303. 1, 7
[33] László A. Székely, Crossing numbers and hard Erds problems in discrete geometry, Combinatorics, Probability and Computing 6 (1997), 353­358. 7
[34] Michael A. Tsfasman, Global fields, codes and sphere packings, Astérisque 198­200 (1991), 373­396. 2 [35] Roope Vehkalahti and Laura Luzzi, Number field lattices achieve gaussian and rayleigh channel capacity within
a constant gap, 2015 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), IEEE, 2015, pp. 436­440. 2 [36] Akshay Venkatesh, A note on sphere packings in high dimension, International Mathematics Research Notices
(2013), 1628­1642. 2 [37] Walfisz, On the class-number of binary quadratic forms, Trav. Inst. Math. Tbilissi 11 (1942), 57­71. 14
Email address: nalon@math.princeton.edu Email address: thomas.bloom@manchester.ac.uk Email address: w.t.gowers@dpmms.cam.ac.uk Email address: Daniel.litt@utoronto.ca Email address: wsawin@math.princeton.edu Email address: ashankar@math.toronto.edu Email address: jacobt@math.toronto.edu Email address: vywang@as.edu.tw Email address: mmwood@math.harvard.edu
19

