                                        ROBIN: A MULTI-AGENT SYSTEM FOR AUTOMATING SCIENTIFIC

                                                                                 DISCOVERY

                                        Ali Essam Ghareeb*, 1     Benjamin Chang*,1,2  Ludovico Mitchener1         Angela Yiu1

arXiv:2505.13400v1 [cs.AI] 19 May 2025  Caralyn J. Szostkiewicz1  Jon M. Laurent1      Muhammed T. Razzak   Andrew D. White1, †

                                        Michaela M. Hinks1, ‡                          Samuel G. Rodriques1, †, ‡

                                                                                            ABSTRACT

                                                   Scientific discovery is driven by the iterative process of background research, hypothesis generation,
                                                   experimentation, and data analysis. Despite recent advancements in applying artificial intelligence
                                                   to scientific discovery, no system has yet automated all of these stages in a single workflow. Here,
                                                  we introduce Robin, the first multi-agent system capable of fully automating the key intellectual
                                                   steps of the scientific process. By integrating literature search agents with data analysis agents,
                                                   Robin can generate hypotheses, propose experiments, interpret experimental results, and generate
                                                   updated hypotheses, achieving a semi-autonomous approach to scientific discovery. By applying
                                                   this system, we were able to identify a novel treatment for dry age-related macular degeneration
                                                  (dAMD), the major cause of blindness in the developed world. Robin proposed enhancing retinal
                                                   pigment epithelium phagocytosis as a therapeutic strategy, and identified and validated a promising
                                                   therapeutic candidate, ripasudil. Ripasudil is a clinically-used rho kinase (ROCK) inhibitor that
                                                   has never previously been proposed for treating dAMD. To elucidate the mechanism of ripasudil-
                                                   induced upregulation of phagocytosis, Robin then proposed and analyzed a follow-up RNA-seq
                                                   experiment, which revealed upregulation of ABCA1, a critical lipid efflux pump and possible novel
                                                   target. All hypotheses, experimental plans, data analyses, and data figures in the main text of this
                                                   report were produced by Robin. As the first AI system to autonomously discover and validate a
                                                   novel therapeutic candidate within an iterative lab-in-the-loop framework, Robin establishes a new
                                                   paradigm for AI-driven scientific discovery.

                                        1 Introduction

                                        Advances in our ability to measure, perturb, and model biological systems have resulted in rapid growth of our collective
                                        scientific knowledge [1]. Yet, complementary technologies to interpret, synthesize, and generate hypotheses from this
                                        knowledge have lagged behind [2]. Artificial intelligence (AI) systems based on large language models (LLMs) show
                                        promise for automating this knowledge synthesis process and accelerating scientific discovery. As a primary goal of
                                        biomedical research is the development of new treatments for disease, our ability to produce new therapeutics may be
                                        the ultimate beneficiary of these approaches. Drug development heavily relies on a confluence of biological, clinical,
                                        and pharmaceutical expertise, and is limited by the rate at which these experts can synthesize the scientific literature [3].

                                        The repurposing of existing drugs for new indications presents a promising application space for LLM systems. The
                                        history of drug repurposing often shows a pattern: while insights often existed in scientific literature, only after a

                                             *Equal contribution.
                                             1FutureHouse, San Francisco, USA.
                                             2University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
                                             †These authors jointly supervise work at FutureHouse.
                                             ‡These authors jointly supervised this work.
significant lag did that knowledge crystallize into a new treatment. For example, dabrafenib, an inhibitor of BRAF
kinase that is used in various cancers with mitogenic mutations in BRAF, is being repurposed to prevent hearing
loss [4, 5]. While its molecular action was well characterized by 2010 [6, 7, 8], dabrafenib’s otoprotective effects were
only discovered 10 years later via unbiased high-throughput screening [6]. This delayed discovery occurred despite
dabrafenib’s otoprotective effects being a direct result of its known inhibition of BRAF [4, 9, 5], suggesting that more
repurposing opportunities could be identified through logical connection of existing biological insights in the literature.
Further cases across medicine – from ketamine (22 year lag [10, 11]) to leucovorin (5 year lag [12, 13]) to KarXT (13
year lag [14, 15]) – underscore how repurposing efforts are frequently realized years after core insights are documented.

Such delays in connecting existing insights to new therapeutic applications highlight the challenge of synthesizing
disparate scientific knowledge. Trained on data across many fields, large language models (LLMs) are able to store and
recall information on a wide variety of scientific topics and thus transcend the limitations of individual human knowledge.
Previous work has shown that fine-tuned LLMs and specialized RAG systems can exceed human performance on
retrieving and summarizing information from the scientific literature. These advances raise the possibility that LLM
systems could be used for novel hypothesis generation [16, 17, 18, 19].

Several LLM systems have recently been developed to automate hypothesis generation [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25].
Specialized systems have also been developed to automate specific tasks in drug discovery, such as prediction of
pharmacological properties and safety profiles [25, 22]. These systems have demonstrated they can generate reasonable
hypotheses by utilizing multi-agent architectures that decompose scientific reasoning into discrete manageable sub-
tasks [25], domain-specific fine-tuning [24, 26], integration of external tools [24, 25], and incorporation of human
feedback [25]. However, none of these systems are currently capable of fully automating the key intellectual steps of the
scientific process, including generating hypotheses and experimental strategies, analyzing results from the experiments,
and refining hypotheses in light of new data.

Here, we introduce Robin, the first multi-agent system for scientific discovery that integrates novel hypothesis generation
with experimental data analysis in one continuous workflow (Figure 1A). Robin utilizes specialized language agents for
literature search (Crow and Falcon) and data analysis (Finch) to enable semi-autonomous scientific discovery [27, 28].
Though this system could be applicable to scientific discovery across disciplines, in this report, we focus on its
potential in therapeutics. Given a disease, Robin automatically identifies relevant in vitro assays that model key disease
mechanisms and proposes specific drug candidates to evaluate in these experimental models. Researchers next conduct
the experiments and provide the resulting data to Robin for autonomous analysis. Robin then interprets the results of this
analysis to generate a new round of therapeutic candidates. Through this process, Robin drives an iterative therapeutics
development cycle where hypotheses are generated, tested, analyzed, and refined based on experimental results. The
key intellectual steps of the scientific method are thus automated while coordinating with scientists throughout the
experimental loop. By connecting literature-based hypothesis generation with experimental data analysis in a continuous
feedback system, Robin represents the first complete implementation of AI-driven scientific discovery.

To demonstrate Robin’s ability to generate and refine novel therapeutic hypotheses, we attempted to identify potential
new treatments for dry age-related macular degeneration (dAMD). dAMD is the leading cause of irreversible sight
loss in developed countries, yet limited treatment options are available. In the U.S. alone, 1.5 million people have
vision-threatening dAMD, and 600,000 are legally blind due to AMD, a figure projected to almost triple by 2050 due
to an aging population [29, 30]. By applying Robin to discover novel therapeutic candidates for dAMD, this work
represents a first step towards AI-generated discovery in scientific research.

2 Results

2.1 Robin: A multi-agent system for scientific discovery

Robin integrates multiple language agents in a structured workflow to generate therapeutic candidates for a given disease
(Figure 1A,B). Crow and Falcon are literature search agents based on PaperQA2 that conduct concise and deep literature
summaries, respectively [27]. PaperQA2 achieves expert-level performance in information retrieval and summarization,
with access to scientific literature, clinical trial reports, and the Open Targets Platform [31]. Finch is a scientific data
analysis agent that performs analyses of experimental data from assays, such as RNA-seq and flow cytometry (Figure
1C) [28]. By coordinating these agents to identify novel therapeutics, Robin enables an experimentally-guided system
that drives the process of scientific discovery. An example of the Robin hypothesis generation workflow is shown in
Supplementary Figure S1.

                                                                      2
a  Input                                                                   Robin System                                 Output

   Target Disease                                                                                                    Therapeutic
         Name                                                                                                        Candidates

         The scientist                      Hypothesis                                             Experimental  Robin proposes top
    directs the system                      Generation                                                Analysis        therapeutic

      by providing the                                                                                           candidates for the
         name of the                                                                                                target disease.

   bdisease to target.                                                     Laboratory Experiments

b                                                                          Laboratory Experiments       Experimental Analysis
                Hypothesis Generation
                                                                                                                  Data Analysis
                     Experimental Assay Selection
                                                                                                                        Finch is called to conduct full
                                Robin first selects an experimental assay                                       bioinformatic analyses and visualizations
                               by conducting literature review with Crow
                                                                                                                         from raw experimental data.
                                      and generating assay proposals.

   Therapeutic Candidate Generation                                                                              Result Interpretation

           Robin generates therapeutic candidates via                                                                 Experimental insights are used to
             scientific synthesis with Falcon literature                                                            generate more informed hypotheses

           search and if provided, experimental results.                                                              and follow-up assays, if needed.

c                                                                                  Falcon                                  Finch
                     Crow
                                                                           The Falcon agent conducts              The Finch agent performs
               The Crow agent conducts                                      deep literature reviews to             autonomous analyses of
             concise literature reviews to                                 generate a comprehensive              experimental data to derive
                                                                             report to evaluate every               insights for hypothesis
                  identify experimental
               strategies and therapeutic                                     therapeutic candidate.                        generation.

                         candidates.

Figure 1: Architecture and workflow of the Robin system. A) Given the name of a target disease, Robin generates
hypotheses and selects top therapeutic candidates to test experimentally. Robin can autonomously analyze raw data
from these experiments to synthesize scientific insights and generate updated therapeutic hypotheses. B) Robin interacts
with language agents to generate hypotheses and analyze experimental data. C) Crow and Falcon are used to conduct
concise and deep literature searches, respectively, to gather information to guide hypothesis generation. Finch performs
analyses of experimental data, which Robin uses to derive insights to inform the next round of hypothesis generation.

2.1.1 Therapeutic hypothesis generation

When provided with a disease name, Robin formulates a series of general questions about the disease pathology and
queries Crow to answer each question (Supplementary section 5.2). Using the reports from Crow as context, Robin next
identifies 10 potential causal disease mechanisms. For each mechanism, Robin again deploys Crow to prepare a detailed
report describing an in vitro model of the disease mechanism and corresponding assay that can be used to test drug
efficacy. Robin uses an LLM judge to make pairwise comparisons between reports, which are used to calculate their
relative rankings (see Methods). The top-ranked in vitro model is used by Robin to define the experimental strategy for
therapeutic candidate hypothesis generation.

                                                                      3
a                                              b
                    IInpuutt
                                                                                                                  phagocytosis
              Dry age-related macular
                      degeneration                                            1 hr                               4 hr                     flow
                                                                                                                                      cytometry
           Experimental Assays                                     + drug              + beads               d
                                                                                                                                                          Count
        1. Phagocytosis Enhancement Assay      c                                                                  8
       2. Oxidative Stress Resistance Assay                                                                       6                                                 100
   3. Mitochondrial Membrane Potential Assay   SSC-A (×105)  9                         Count     FSC-H (×105)     4 Singlets                                        10
     4. Drusen-Like Deposit Formation Assay
    5. TEER Measurement for RPE Barrier...                   6                             1000
                                                                                           100
      Therapeutic Candidate Goal                             3                             10
                                                                                           1
         Screen a diverse small‐molecule                                                                                  2                                                        1
        library to identify compounds that
     enhance RPE‐mediated phagocytic...                      0

         Therapeutic Candidates                                 0   3      6        9                                           3  6  9

       1. Exendin-4, a GLP-1 agonist, will...                      FSC-A (×105 )                                                   FSC-A (×105)
       2. Fingolimod enhances phagocytic...
       3. The combination of AICAR and T...    e                                                 f                                    DMSO
       4. Y-27632, a ROCK inhibitor, will...
       5. MFGE8 will enhance RPE-medi...                      Live                                          *
       6. Danicopan, a complement inhibit...
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                             MFI (x10e4)
                                                             2000

                                               Count                                                                         1

                                                             1000                                                            0

                                                                  0                                                          Y-2763M2FEGxEe8nFdining-o4limoAAdIICCAATRRUD+CTAUDCA
                                                                     0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
                                                                                                                                    Drug Treatment
                                                                      DAPI Intensity (×105)

Figure 2: Robin generates therapeutic candidate hypotheses for dry AMD and analyzes experimental data from
in vitro tests A) Robin proposes several experimental assays and ultimately decides to use an RPE phagocytosis
enhancement assay. Robin synthesizes this strategy into an overall goal and then generates several novel therapeutic
candidates to enhance RPE phagocytosis. B) Schematic representation of the phagocytosis assay. RPE cells are
incubated with the drug for 1 hour before pHrodo beads are added. The cells are incubated with the beads for 3 hours
and phagocytic activity is measured via flow cytometry. C-F) Example plots from a Finch flow cytometry analysis
trajectory, formatted for readability in publication by a human. C) Finch performs gating to discard debris using a
FSC-A vs SSC-A plot. D) Finch gates singlet cells from the FSC-H vs FSC-A plot. E) Finch identifies the DAPI signal
and excludes dead cells. F) Finch performs statistical tests to compare candidate drugs to the DMSO control and plots
the results.

Once an in vitro model is selected, Robin conducts a similar sequence of general literature review and hypothesis
generation to propose 30 therapeutic candidates for experimental testing. Robin then queries Falcon to generate a
detailed report to evaluate each candidate. These reports contain both justification for why each drug is suitable
for mitigating the disease mechanism represented in the in vitro model and potential limitations the drug may pose.
The drug candidates are ranked by an LLM-judged tournament according to the strength of the scientific rationale,
pharmacological profile, and methodology of the supporting literature. This ranked list can then be reviewed by human
scientists, and top drug candidates can be tested in the lab by executing an experimental protocol based on the assay
suggested by Robin.

                                                                      4
2.1.2 Experimental data analysis

Once experiments are complete, the scientist uploads raw or semi-processed data and prompts Robin with a desired
analysis approach, e.g., “RNA-seq differential expression analysis” or “flow cytometry". Robin then deploys Finch to
carry out the desired analysis. This analysis step presents unique challenges due to the inherently ambiguous nature of
biological data interpretation. For example, the gating choices in flow cytometry analysis or the filters used in RNA-seq
analyses will vary between human scientists and may impact the final conclusions. Similarly, Finch’s analysis results
can vary between runs, even when given identical prompts and data, due to the stochasticity of the language agent.
To leverage this diversity, Robin can launch 10 Finch analysis trajectories, each of which independently analyzes the
experimental data. In each trajectory, Finch executes analysis code in a Jupyter notebook and provides an interpretable
and reproducible summary of its findings. After all trajectories are complete, a meta-analysis can be conducted to
synthesize all outputs into a consensus-driven conclusion. In this way, Finch both explores diverse analytical trajectories
while delivering highly consistent end results based on consensus (Methods) [32].

Finally, Robin distills actionable scientific insights from these processed experimental results. Robin also has the ability
to propose targeted follow-up assays to explore or confirm significant or unexpected findings. These experimental
insights are used to inform the next cycle of therapeutic hypothesis generation. The cycle continues until a human has a
satisfactory novel drug candidate.

2.2 Robin identifies novel therapeutic candidates for dry AMD

We applied Robin to generate therapeutic candidates for dAMD as an initial proof-of-concept (Figure 2A). Robin began
the therapeutic hypothesis generation workflow by identifying and reviewing 151 papers to propose ten biologically
relevant dAMD mechanisms to assay. After ranking the disease mechanisms and corresponding experimental strategies,
Robin proposed treating dAMD by increasing RPE cell phagocytosis, and suggested testing how well drugs increase
the phagocytic capacity of either patient-derived RPE cells or ARPE-19 cells in a flow cytometry assay.

Robin then deployed Crow to conduct a literature review of about 400 papers about RPE phagocytosis and the therapeutic
landscape of dry AMD and synthesized the results to propose 30 existing drug candidates for experimental testing in
the phagocytosis assay. Robin called Falcon to produce comprehensive evaluation reports on each of these molecules
(Supplementary Figure S9), which were ranked in an LLM-judged tournament.

2.2.1 ROCK inhibitors enhance RPE phagocytosis

We then selected the top five candidates from this ranking for experimental testing: Exendin-4, Fingolimod, MFGE8,
Y-27632, and the combination of AICAR and TUDCA. Although Robin suggested using fluorescently labeled photore-
ceptor outer segments as a substrate for RPE phagocytosis, we instead decided to use pHrodo beads due to availability.
pHrodo beads are fluorescently activated in the low pH environment of the lysosome, allowing detection of phagocytosis
in single cells using flow cytometry (Figure 2B). After testing these therapeutic candidates in the RPE phagocytosis
assay, the raw flow cytometry data, associated metadata, and an analysis prompt were uploaded to Robin. Robin
called the data analysis agent Finch, which developed a Jupyter notebook to quantify the effect of each compound
on RPE phagocytosis by gating the flow cytometry data and performing statistical tests. Plots from a representative
individual Finch trajectory are shown in Figure 2C-F. These results were confirmed by a human analysis of the same
data (Supplementary Figure S13). Preclinical models have demonstrated that Y-27632 can restore phagocytic efficiency
in RPE cells [33], confirming Robin’s literature-based rationale for suggesting this candidate.

2.2.2 Automated RNA-seq analysis characterizes transcriptional changes induced by ROCKi-enhanced
         phagocytosis

After analyzing the initial flow cytometry results, Robin recommended RNA sequencing of Y-27632-treated RPE cells
to investigate the transcriptional effects of ROCK inhibition (Figure 3A). We conducted a second RPE phagocytosis
experiment with Y-27632 and profiled the samples using bulk RNA sequencing. Finch conducted differential gene
expression (DGE) analysis and summarized results in a volcano plot (Figure 3B). While previous studies have shown
that Y-27632 enhances phagocytic cup formation through post-translational regulation of F-actin dynamics [34, 35, 36,
37, 38], Finch’s DGE analysis revealed that Y-27632 treatment also induced rapid transcriptional changes in RPE cells
during phagocytosis. Finch’s consensus analysis demonstrated that Finch identified the same genes as significantly
differentially expressed in over 50% of trajectories (Figure 3C). Finch next performed GO enrichment analysis and
found that Y-27632 significantly altered the expression of genes involved in actin filament organization, small GTPase-
mediated signal transduction, and autophagy pathways upon phagocytosis (Figure 3D). These results suggest that
Y-27632 enhances the initial uptake phase of phagocytosis through cytoskeletal rearrangements and promotes clearance
of internalized material through transcriptional regulation of autophagy. Further work is necessary to confirm whether

                                                                      5
a                                                           Follow-up Assays                                                                     b 250                      FSTL3
                                                                                                                                                                 FHL2
           Result Interpretation                          RNA-seq                                                                                       200
                                        Percentage of Genes (%)Performing RNA-seq on                                                                    150          CYP1B1                                 Status
          Data Interpretation:                                                                                                     -Log10 p-valueRPE cells treated with100  ABCA1
          The data indicate that                          lead compounds (e.g.,                                                                                                                                Upregulated
          among the tested comp...                        Y-27632 and Exendin-4)                                                                         50                                                    Downregulated
          Mechanistic Insights:                           individually and in                                                                                                                                  Not Significant
          ROCK inhibition by Y-27632                      combination will provide
          may facilitate actin cytosk...                  insights into the                                                                        0
          Questions Raised:                               transcriptional changes
          1. What specific molecular                      underlying enhanced                                                                                -6  -3  0                                3  6
          mechanisms underlie the...                      phagocytosis. This
                                                          experiment will help...                                                                                    Log2FC
          Follow-up Assays:
          RNA-seq. Performing RNA-                                                                                                                               (Y-27632+beads vs. WT+beads)
          seq on RPE cells treated...

c                                                                                                                                                d                                                                         p.adjust

           100                                                                                                                                          actin filament organization
                                                                                                                                                        ribonucleoprotein complex
                                        80                                                                                                                                                                                 2e-09
                                                                                                                                                                             biogenesis
                                                                     Percentage of                                                                small GTPase-mediated signal                                             4e-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6e-09
                                        60                           trajectories                                                                                   regulatrtiaonnsdouf catciotinn
                                                                                                                                                            filament-based process
                                                                     100%
                                                                                                                                                                ribosome biogenesis
                                        40                           50-100%                                                                                                                                               Count
                                                                     0-50%                                                                                           macroautophagy
                                                                                                                                                                 cellular response to                                           80
                                        20                                                                                                                     proteeixntelorncaallizsatitmiounlutos                            100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                120
                                        0                                                                                                                                        nucleus                                        140
                                                                                                                                                           rRNA metabolic process                                               160

                                            down neutral  up                                                                                                    actin filament bundle                    0.03 0.04   0.05
                                                                                                                                                                           organization                   GeneRatio

                                                                                                                                                                                     0.02

                                            regulated     regulated

Figure 3: RNA-sequencing analysis of ARPE-19 cells treated with ROCK inhibitor Y-27632. A) Robin interprets
results from the first experiment and proposes follow-up assays. B-D) Example plots from a Finch RNA-seq analysis,
formatted for readability in publication by a human. B) Finch-made volcano plot showing differentially expressed
genes between Y27632-treated and wildtype cells after phagocytosis. C) Finch-made consensus findings from eight
RNA-seq analysis trajectories, showing the percentage of analyses that identified the same genes as consistently up- or
down-regulated. D) Finch-made GO-term enrichment of differentially expressed genes.

these changes are specific to Y-27632 or are generalizable to any intervention that significantly increases phagocytic
capacity. The human version of this analysis is similar to that of Finch and is shown in (Supplementary Figure S15)
The DGE analysis identified a 3-fold upregulation (adjusted p=2.13x10−83) of ABCA1, a critical lipid efflux pump, in
Y-27632-treated cells. Differential expression of ABCA1 upon ROCKi-induced phagocytosis has significant implications
for dAMD, as ABCA1 is essential for healthy RPE function. ABCA1 facilitates the active transport of cholesterol and
phospholipids from the plasma membrane to acceptor proteins prior to their ejection from the cell. Notably, ABCA1
belongs to the same transporter family as ABCA4, which has been previously identified as a therapeutic target in macular
degeneration pathogenesis [39]. Further connecting these findings to dAMD pathology, Apo-E, a lipid acceptor for
ABCA1, has also been identified as a potential therapeutic target for dAMD [40]. These mechanistic insights, derived
from experiments proposed by Robin and analyzed by Finch, demonstrate how AI-driven scientific discovery can not
only identify effective therapeutic compounds but also reveal novel molecular targets within disease pathways that
might have otherwise remained unexplored.

2.2.3 Ripasudil as a drug repurposing candidate for dry AMD

In addition to suggesting RNA-seq analysis on Y-27632, Robin also conducted a subsequent iteration of candidate drug
hypotheses. We tested 10 of these drugs experimentally and provided the data to Finch for analysis. Finch’s analysis
showed that ripasudil, a ROCK inhibitor approved for treatment of glaucoma in Japan, outperformed Y-27632 and
increased RPE cell phagocytosis 7.5-fold compared to DMSO controls (Figure 4A,B; human analysis showed 1.75-fold

                                                                      6
a                             Hypothesis Generation              b                Sig. increased  FALSE  TRUE
      Therapeutic Candidates                                              10
                              Ripasudil offers improved
          Ripasudil           selectivity and pharmacokinetics   MFI (x104)  7.5
          GW4064              compared to traditional ROCK
          B-Ionone            inhibitors like Y-27632. By                    5
          NECA                facilitating cytoskeletal
          Bay K8644           relaxation, Ripasudil may allow                2.5
          KL001               for greater membrane flexibility                                                                                                                    DMSO
          Rolipram            and phagocytic cup formation in
          Vorinostat          RPE cells. Given the experimental                0
          Simvastatin         data suggesting that ROCK                       RipasuYd-2il76M32FVGoErSi8niomsvtaaBtsataytiKnS8im64vKR4aLas0tpBa0aMt1imnSy+-c7iR7n7e6sv0e7raGtrWoSl4i0p6o4nimB-oIRodneosvneeratroNl ERCoAPliCpFry-a5tom7c43h-2pa2hla8esninylbDutyric
          Rapamycin           inhibition significantly...
          Resveratrol

Figure 4: Ripasudil significantly enhances RPE phagocytosis. A) Excerpt of Robin proposal for ripasudil. Drawing
from the insights from the first round of experimental analysis, Robin proposes ripasudil as a therapeutic candidate
for treating dry AMD. B) Analyzed flow cytometry data from the second round of experiments shows that ripasudil
significantly enhances phagocytosis in RPE cells, inducing an even greater effect than Y-27632.

increase in Supplementary Figure S14). Although further testing at different doses and longer incubation times would
be necessary for definitive comparison, the initial superior performance of ripasudil relative to Y-27632 demonstrates
Robin’s ability to progressively refine therapeutic hypotheses through iterative experimentation and feedback.

3 Discussion

In this report, we present Robin, a multi-agent system integrating automated hypothesis generation and experimental
data analysis for scientific discovery. When tasked with identifying novel therapeutics for dAMD, Robin proposed
enhancing RPE cell phagocytosis using ROCK inhibitors, and discovered ripasudil as the most potent enhancer
of RPE phagocytosis among tested compounds through an iterative lab-in-the-loop discovery cycle. Ripasudil’s
established safety profile and clinical approval for ocular use present a promising drug repurposing opportunity that
could significantly accelerate the development pathway for dAMD treatment.

Notably, while ROCK inhibitors have been previously suggested for treatment of wet AMD and other retinal diseases
of neovascularization, Robin is the first to propose their application in dry AMD for their effect on phagocytosis [35].
This approach is supported by several lines of evidence, as RPE phagocytic dysfunction is observed not only with
normal aging but is pronounced in AMD patients [41, 42, 43]. In investigating the basis for Robin’s initial identification
of Y-27632, we found that the literature search included a single paper demonstrating Y-27632’s ability to enhance
phagocytic efficiency in “low-phagocytic” RPE cells from human donors by promoting actin polymerization [42]. Taken
together, these results demonstrate Robin’s ability to effectively generate novel hypotheses by synthesizing insights
already present in the scientific literature.

Beyond the specific application of dAMD, Robin addresses a broader challenge in therapeutic development. With
FDA approvals stagnating at approximately 50 novel drugs annually over the past decade [44], new approaches to
scale therapeutic discovery are urgently needed. As the first system to automate both literature-grounded hypothesis
generation and experimental data analysis, Robin is poised to accelerate the pace of drug discovery compared to
traditional approaches. We demonstrate Robin’s broader applicability by generating hypotheses for 10 additional
diseases with pressing therapeutic needs (Supplementary Figures S16-S25).

In its current implementation, Robin has several opportunities for continued development. For example, while Robin
generates experimental outlines, it does not yet produce precise, executable protocols—future iterations aim to provide
detailed methodologies that require minimal human translation for laboratory execution. The Finch data analysis agent
is also heavily reliant on prompt engineering by domain experts to produce reliable analytical results. Adapting Finch
to independently generate or adapt prompts to specific data modalities would enable a more autonomous discovery
pipeline. Finally, while Robin uses an LLM-judged tournament to nominate therapeutic hypotheses, future work on
better aligning hypothesis generation and evaluation with human scientific judgment may be helpful in more reliably
producing high-quality hypotheses.

                                                                      7
By automating hypothesis generation, experimental planning, and data analysis in an integrated system, Robin represents
a powerful new paradigm for AI-driven scientific discovery. This approach can be used to not only reshape therapeutic
development, but fundamentally accelerate the scientific process to drive a greater understanding of the natural world.

4 Methods

4.1 Robin Implementation

Robin is implemented as a Jupyter notebook using the Aviary framework to instantiate and call agents [32]. Robin
utilizes the OpenAI o4-mini model to synthesize literature and generate hypotheses, and the Anthropic Claude 3.7
Sonnet model as the judge for pairwise comparisons to rank hypotheses.

Notably, while the experiments in this paper were conducted using an agentic implementation of Robin, we observed
that Robin almost always called tools in the same order, leading to a deterministic workflow. Therefore, we translated
Robin into a streamlined Jupyter notebook to improve stability and ease of use.

The ranking of hypotheses was calculated via a series of pairwise comparisons adjudicated by the LLM judge. When
ranking 25 or fewer hypotheses, all possible pairs were compared in a round robin tournament. When considering
more than 25 hypotheses, 300 pairwise comparisons were randomly selected to achieve a comprehensive assessment
within reasonable computational and time constraints. The outcomes from these comparisons were used to estimate
strength parameters via the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model, which subsequently informed the relative ranking of
each hypothesis [45].

To generate the prompt for this LLM judge, domain experts were asked to conduct pairwise comparisons of Robin’s
therapeutic candidate hypotheses. The results of these expert evaluations were given to Google’s Gemini 2.5 Pro
Preview model to generate a prompt for Robin’s LLM judge. This approach was designed to elicit decision-making
from the LLM judge consistent with expert preferences and criteria.

When comparing the LLM judge’s preferences with experts’, the LLM judge demonstrated high concordance with expert
preferences, with an average of 7.25 of its top 10 hypotheses matching those in the experts’ top 10 (Supplementary
Figure S11A). This concordance is more than double that expected from random selection. Furthermore, the LLM
judge exhibited higher intra-rater consistency than human experts (Supplementary Figure S11B). When presented with
identical pairwise comparisons, the LLM judge selected the same hypothesis in 88% of comparisons, as compared with
human experts who selected the same hypothesis 61% of the time.

4.2 Finch Implementation

Finch, initially introduced in BixBench, is an autonomous, Jupyter-native data analysis agent designed using the
Aviary framework [32]. Finch systematically processes bioinformatics workflows, such as RNA sequencing differential
expression analysis or flow cytometry, based on a provided dataset and research question.

The agent operates within a structured execution environment provided by the Aviary framework, an extensible
gymnasium tailored for language agent evaluation and iterative problem-solving. Aviary was selected specifically for
its controlled environment, supporting reproducible evaluations through standardized software environments, consistent
tool access, and structured multi-step reasoning.

Finch leverages an agentic prompting strategy based on the ReAct approach, balancing logical reasoning and practical
execution effectively [46]. Each Finch trajectory unfolds within a pre-built Docker container (BixBench-env:v1.0),
containing extensive bioinformatics-oriented Python, R, and Bash libraries. This standardized container ensures
reproducibility and isolates evaluation strictly to Finch’s analytical capability rather than software installation or
dependency management. That being said, Finch is capable of installing new dependencies when needed and does so
competently.

4.2.1 Tools and Environment

Finch interacts exclusively via two tools enabled by the Aviary framework:

        • edit_cell: The agent can select, modify, and execute cells within a Jupyter notebook.
        • submit_answer: Finalizes and submits the agent’s analytical conclusion.

Prompt engineering was thoroughly explored to optimize Finch’s initial instructions, with an example provided in
Supplementary Figure S10. All Finch trajectories are available through the FutureHouse platform.

                                                                      8
4.3 Cell Culture

ARPE-19 cells (ATCC; Cat. No. CRL-2302) are maintained in DMEM/F12 (Corning; Cat. No. 15-090-CV), with
10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco; Cat. No. 10082-147), 2mM L-glutamine (Gibco; Cat. No. 25030-081), 1mM sodium
pyruvate (Gibco; Cat. No. 11360-070) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco; Cat. No. 15140-122) at 37°C, 5% CO2.
For phagocytosis assays, cells are seeded in 96-well tissue culture plates at a density of 1x104 cells per well with 100
µL of complete cell media. They are grown to confluence and then incubated for a further 7 days, during which the
media is not changed. At this point they have formed a monolayer and show signs of differentiation (melanin granule
expression, cobblestone morphology) [47].

4.4 Phagocytosis Assay

4.4.1 Drug Library Preparation

Optimal cell culture concentrations for the drugs proposed by Robin were found in the literature and if multiple
concentrations were proposed, the highest was selected for use in the phagocytosis assay. On the day of the phagocytosis
experiment, drug stocks were used to prepare working stocks in complete media at 2X working concentration. AICAR
and TUDCA were used in combination at the concentrations below.

Drug                                                                                     Working concentration
Y-27632 (Cayman Chemical Company; Cat. No. 10005583)                                     20µM [48]
AICAR (Sigma-Aldrich; Cat. No. A9978)                                                    1mM [49]
Tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) (TargetMol; Cat. No. T2532)                            100µM [50]
Exendin-4 (TargetMol; Cat. No. T3967)                                                    1µM [51]
MLN120β (TargetMol; Cat. No. TQ0306)                                                     20µM [52]
Fingolimod (PeproTech; Cat. No. 1625605)                                                 1µM [53]
MFGE-8 (Sino Biological; Cat. No. 10853-H27B-B-20)                                       2.5µg/mL [54]
Ripasudil (Cayman Chemical Company; Cat. No. 19920)                                      100µM [55]
Vorinostat (Active Motif; Cat No. 14027)                                                 5µM [56]
Simvastatin (TargetMol; Cat No. T0687)                                                   1µM
Resveratrol (PeproTech; Cat No. 5013606)                                                 16mM [57]
Bay K8644 (Alomone Labs; Cat No. B-350)                                                  3µM [58]
KL001 (Cayman Chemical Company; Cat No. 13878)                                           50µM [59]
Rapamycin (Gift from RetroBio)                                                           100nM [60]
BMS-777607 (ApexBio; Cat No. A5703)                                                      10µM [61]
NECA (5’-N-ethylcarboxamidoadenosine; Cayman Chemical Company; Cat No.                   10µM [62]
21420)
Rolipram (PeproTech; Cat No. 6145453)                                                    10µM
PF-573228 (ApexBio; Cat No. B1523)                                                       5µM [63]
4-phenylbutyric acid (ApexBio; Cat No. C6831)                                            10mM [64]
B-Ionone (AA Blocks; Cat No. AA003JVY)                                                   200µM [65]
Siponimod (TargetMol; Cat No. T6403)                                                     10mM [66]

                                      Table 1: List of Drugs and Working Concentrations

4.4.2 pHrodo Bead Preparation

To specifically detect phagocytosed particles, we utilized pHrodo beads (ThermoFisher; Cat. No. A10010) which are
fluorescent only in the low pH of the lysosome. Deep red E. coli pHrodo beads were thawed and a single vial was
resuspended in 2 ml PBS as per the manufacturer’s instructions. The resuspended beads (protected from light) were
then sonicated for 10 minutes in a water bath at RT before addition to the cell assay plate.

                                                                      9
4.4.3 Phagocytosis Assay

For the phagocytosis assays, cells were treated with test compounds or vehicle control (0.5% DMSO) for 60 minutes
at 37°C, 5% CO2, prior to bead addition by adding 100 µL of 2X drug stock in complete media to the cells. At 60
minutes, 10 µL of pHrodo beads (approximately 10µg of beads) were added to each well. After bead addition, plates
were incubated at 37°C for 3 hours while phagocytosis of the pHrodo beads proceeded. Cells were treated with TrypLE
Express (Gibco; Cat. No. 12604-013) for 10 minutes and washed with FACS buffer (1% BSA and 500 ng/ml DAPI in
calcium and magnesium-free PBS) to achieve a cell suspension suitable for flow cytometry.

4.4.4 Flow Cytometry

ARPE-19 cells suspended in FACS buffer in 96-well cell culture plates were immediately transferred to an Attune NxT
flow cytometer (ThermoFisher; Cat. No. A24858) equipped with an Autosampler. Fluorescence from the pHrodo beads
and DAPI was stimulated using the 637 and 405 nm lasers, respectively, and detected using the 670/14 and 450/40
filters, respectively. All events were analyzed until the full volume of the well was aspirated to capture the entire cell
population. A minimum of 4,000 events per well were recorded to ensure adequate statistical power (excluding the
bead-only (no cell) control).

4.4.5 RNA Sequencing

ARPE-19 cells were seeded in 24-well tissue culture plates and cells were lysed and RNA extracted using the Maxwell
RSC 48 (Promega; Cat. No. AS8500) and Maxwell RSC SimplyTissue kit (Promega; Cat. No. AS1340) as per the
manufacturer’s guidelines. Total RNA was quantified using a Qubit instrument (ThermoFisher; Cat. No. Q33327) and
Qubit high-sensitivity RNA kit (ThermoFisher; Cat. No. Q10210). Using 1 µg of total RNA as input, poly-A tailed
mRNA was isolated using NEBNext® Poly(A) mRNA Magnetic Isolation Module (New England Biolabs; Cat. No.
E7490) and then prepared for sequencing using the NEBNext Ultra II Directional RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina
(New England Biolabs; Cat. No. E7760). Quality control was performed using an Agilent Bioanalyzer. Libraries (with
1% PhiX spiked in) were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 2000 with 75 base-pair paired-end reads using a P3 flow
cell.

4.5 Data Analysis

4.5.1 Flow Cytometry

Finch, the data analysis agent, performed end-to-end analysis of our flow cytometry data. Debris and cell aggregates
were excluded from the analysis based on forward and side scatter parameters. In general, Finch clusters the forward
scatter versus side scatter plot by using the flowMeans package for the R programming language to apply a k-means
clustering before choosing the cluster most likely to contain the main cell population. For subsequent gates, Finch
generated scatter plots and then used the plots to define gates. Single cells were gated based on pulse width and area
parameters. The mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of the pHrodo signal was quantified for each well to assess the
extent of phagocytosis.

Flow cytometry data was also analyzed by a human scientist. Those strategies are shown in Supplementary Figures 2
and 3. The human flow cytometry analysis was similar to Finch’s except that the human analysis had the additional
step of using the no-bead control to remove background signal in the Alexa 647 channel, which proved minimal. The
human analysis started by identifying the main cell population in the forward versus side scatter plot. Next, singlets
were identified. Dead cells were then removed using the DAPI channel before finally removing Alexa 647 background
signal using the no bead control.

4.5.2 RNA Sequencing

Read demultiplexing and alignment was performed by a human and subsequent differential gene expression analysis
was performed by Finch.

4.5.3 Read Alignment and Processing

Raw paired-end RNA-Seq reads (2 × 150 bp) for twelve samples (including Y27632-treated, wild-type, and bead-treated
conditions) were processed using a custom Bash pipeline. Sequencing files (*_R1_001.fastq.gz and *_R2_001.fastq.gz)
were retrieved from the FASTQ directory and aligned individually to the GRCh38 human reference genome (HISAT2
index built from GENCODE v44) using HISAT2 with the –dta flag to retain splice junction information for downstream
transcriptome assembly. Alignments were performed with eight CPU threads (-p 8) and output in SAM format. Each

                                                                     10
SAM file was converted to BAM with samtools view -bS, then sorted (samtools sort) and indexed (samtools index) to
produce compressed, coordinate-sorted BAMs. Intermediate SAM and unsorted BAM files were removed to conserve
disk space. This procedure ensured that all alignments were uniformly processed and ready for quantitative analysis.
4.5.4 Gene-Level Quantification
Gene counts were obtained with the featureCounts tool from the Subread package, using the GENCODE v44 GTF
annotation file. Paired-end mode (-p) was specified to correctly handle fragment counting, and eight threads (-T 8) were
used to accelerate processing. All of the indexed, sorted BAM files were supplied simultaneously, and read assignment
to genes was performed according to the provided exon features. The resulting raw gene-level count matrix was
written to gene_counts.txt, serving as the input for subsequent normalization and differential expression analyses. This
workflow provides a reproducible framework for high-throughput RNA-Seq data processing from raw reads through
gene-level quantification.
4.5.5 Differential Gene Expression Analysis
Raw gene counts were imported into R (v4.2.0) and filtered to remove non-count columns, yielding a matrix of 6 samples
across two conditions (Y-27632, untreated). The count matrix and metadata were encapsulated in a DESeqDataSet object
(DESeq2 v1.36.0) [67]. Normalization, dispersion estimation, and Wald tests were performed to detect differential
expression. Transcript identifiers were mapped to gene symbols using biomaRt, and one pairwise contrasts were defined
(Y-27632 versus untreated) [68]. Results were ordered by adjusted p-value, exported to CSV, and volcano plots were
generated with EnhancedVolcano (v1.14.0) using thresholds of |log2FC| > 1 and adj. p < 0.05 [69].

Acknowledgements

We would like to acknowledge Michael Skarlinski, Mayk Caldas, Tyler Nadolski, James Braza, and Siddharth Narayanan
for their help in supporting this research and reviewing this manuscript. We are also grateful to all our colleagues at
FutureHouse for their support.

Data and Code Availability

Sample trajectories for Robin and Finch, as well as the code for Robin will be available at github.com/
Future-House/robin

                                                                     11
References

 [1] Zachary D. Stephens, Skylar Y. Lee, Faraz Faghri, Roy H. Campbell, Chengxiang Zhai, Miles J. Efron, Ravishankar
      Iyer, Michael C. Schatz, Saurabh Sinha, and Gene E. Robinson. Big Data: Astronomical or Genomical? PLOS
      Biology, 13(7):e1002195, July 2015. Publisher: Public Library of Science.

 [2] Paul Nurse. Biology must generate ideas as well as data. Nature, 597(7876):305–305, September 2021.
      Bandiera_abtest: a Cg_type: World View Publisher: Nature Publishing Group Subject_term: Research manage-
      ment, Databases.

 [3] Feixiong Cheng, Yifang Ma, Brian Uzzi, and Joseph Loscalzo. Importance of scientific collaboration in con-
      temporary drug discovery and development: a detailed network analysis. BMC Biology, 18(1):138, October
      2020.

 [4] Matthew A. Ingersoll, Emma A. Malloy, Lauryn E. Caster, Eva M. Holland, Zhenhang Xu, Marisa Zallocchi,
      Duane Currier, Huizhan Liu, David Z.Z. He, Jaeki Min, Taosheng Chen, Jian Zuo, and Tal Teitz. BRAF inhibition
      protects against hearing loss in mice. Science Advances, 6(49):eabd0561, December 2020.

 [5] Matthew A. Ingersoll, Richard D. Lutze, Chithra K. Pushpan, Regina G. Kelmann, Huizhan Liu, Mark T. May,
      William J. Hunter, David Z.Z. He, and Tal Teitz. Dabrafenib protects from cisplatin-induced hearing loss in a
      clinically relevant mouse model. JCI Insight, 8(24):e171140.

 [6] Clinical Trials register - Search for 2009-015297-36.

 [7] GlaxoSmithKline. A Phase II (BRF113710) Single-arm, Open-label Study of GSK2118436 in BRAF Mutant
      Metastatic Melanoma. Clinical trial registration NCT01153763, clinicaltrials.gov, August 2017. submitted:
      2010-05-27.

 [8] Antoni Ribas and Keith T. Flaherty. BRAF targeted therapy changes the treatment paradigm in melanoma. Nature
      Reviews. Clinical Oncology, 8(7):426–433, May 2011.

 [9] Manuela Lahne and Jonathan E. Gale. Damage-Induced Activation of ERK1/2 in Cochlear Supporting Cells Is a
      Hair Cell Death-Promoting Signal That Depends on Extracellular ATP and Calcium. The Journal of Neuroscience,
      28(19):4918–4928, May 2008.

[10] R. M. Berman, A. Cappiello, A. Anand, D. A. Oren, G. R. Heninger, D. S. Charney, and J. H. Krystal. Antidepres-
      sant effects of ketamine in depressed patients. Biological Psychiatry, 47(4):351–354, February 2000.

[11] PCP Phencyclidine Abuse an Appraisal, 21.

[12] R E Frye, J M Sequeira, E V Quadros, S J James, and D A Rossignol. Cerebral folate receptor autoantibodies in
      autism spectrum disorder. Molecular Psychiatry, 18(3):369–381, March 2013.

[13] V. T. Ramaekers, N. Blau, J. M. Sequeira, M.-C. Nassogne, and E. V. Quadros. Folate Receptor Autoimmunity and
      Cerebral Folate Deficiency in Low-Functioning Autism with Neurological Deficits. Neuropediatrics, 38:276–281,
      May 2008. Publisher: © Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

[14] P. Sauerberg, P. H. Olesen, S. Nielsen, S. Treppendahl, M. J. Sheardown, T. Honoré, C. H. Mitch, J. S. Ward, A. J.
      Pike, and F. P. Bymaster. Novel functional M1 selective muscarinic agonists. Synthesis and structure-activity
      relationships of 3-(1,2,5-thiadiazolyl)-1,2,5,6-tetrahydro-1-methylpyridines. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry,
      35(12):2274–2283, June 1992.

[15] krtx-10k_20191231.htm.

[16] Ross Taylor, Marcin Kardas, Guillem Cucurull, Thomas Scialom, Anthony Hartshorn, Elvis Saravia, Andrew
      Poulton, Viktor Kerkez, and Robert Stojnic. Galactica: A Large Language Model for Science, November 2022.
      arXiv:2211.09085 [cs].

[17] Hamed Babaei Giglou, Jennifer D’Souza, and Sören Auer. LLMs4Synthesis: Leveraging Large Language Models
      for Scientific Synthesis, September 2024. arXiv:2409.18812 [cs].

[18] Shubham Agarwal, Gaurav Sahu, Abhay Puri, Issam H. Laradji, Krishnamurthy DJ Dvijotham, Jason Stan-
      ley, Laurent Charlin, and Christopher Pal. LitLLM: A Toolkit for Scientific Literature Review, March 2025.
      arXiv:2402.01788 [cs].

[19] Zhiping Paul Wang, Priyanka Bhandary, Yizhou Wang, and Jason H. Moore. Using GPT-4 to write a scientific
      review article: a pilot evaluation study. BioData Mining, 17(1):16, June 2024.

[20] Kexin Huang, Ying Jin, Ryan Li, Michael Y. Li, Emmanuel Candès, and Jure Leskovec. Automated Hypothesis
      Validation with Agentic Sequential Falsifications, February 2025. arXiv:2502.09858 [cs].

                                                                     12
[21] Daniil A. Boiko, Robert MacKnight, Ben Kline, and Gabe Gomes. Autonomous chemical research with large
      language models. Nature, 624(7992):570–578, December 2023. Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.

[22] Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The AI Scientist: Towards
      Fully Automated Open-Ended Scientific Discovery, September 2024. arXiv:2408.06292 [cs].

[23] Tal Ifargan, Lukas Hafner, Maor Kern, Ori Alcalay, and Roy Kishony. Autonomous LLM-driven research from
      data to human-verifiable research papers, April 2024. arXiv:2404.17605 [q-bio].

[24] Eric Wang, Samuel Schmidgall, Paul F. Jaeger, Fan Zhang, Rory Pilgrim, Yossi Matias, Joelle Barral, David Fleet,
      and Shekoofeh Azizi. TxGemma: Efficient and Agentic LLMs for Therapeutics, April 2025. arXiv:2504.06196
      [cs].

[25] Juraj Gottweis, Wei-Hung Weng, Alexander Daryin, Tao Tu, Anil Palepu, Petar Sirkovic, Artiom Myaskovsky,
      Felix Weissenberger, Keran Rong, Ryutaro Tanno, Khaled Saab, Dan Popovici, Jacob Blum, Fan Zhang, Katherine
      Chou, Avinatan Hassidim, Burak Gokturk, Amin Vahdat, Pushmeet Kohli, Yossi Matias, Andrew Carroll, Kavita
      Kulkarni, Nenad Tomasev, Yuan Guan, Vikram Dhillon, Eeshit Dhaval Vaishnav, Byron Lee, Tiago R. D. Costa,
      José R. Penadés, Gary Peltz, Yunhan Xu, Annalisa Pawlosky, Alan Karthikesalingam, and Vivek Natarajan.
      Towards an AI co-scientist, February 2025. arXiv:2502.18864 [cs].

[26] Juan Manuel Zambrano Chaves, Eric Wang, Tao Tu, Eeshit Dhaval Vaishnav, Byron Lee, S. Sara Mahdavi,
      Christopher Semturs, David Fleet, Vivek Natarajan, and Shekoofeh Azizi. Tx-LLM: A Large Language Model for
      Therapeutics, June 2024. arXiv:2406.06316 [cs].

[27] Michael D. Skarlinski, Sam Cox, Jon M. Laurent, James D. Braza, Michaela Hinks, Michael J. Hammerling,
      Manvitha Ponnapati, Samuel G. Rodriques, and Andrew D. White. Language agents achieve superhuman synthesis
      of scientific knowledge, September 2024. arXiv:2409.13740 [cs].

[28] Ludovico Mitchener, Jon M Laurent, Benjamin Tenmann, Siddharth Narayanan, Geemi P Wellawatte, Andrew
      White, Lorenzo Sani, and Samuel G Rodriques. Bixbench: A comprehensive benchmark for llm-based agents in
      computational biology, Mar 2025.

[29] Monika Fleckenstein, Steffen Schmitz-Valckenberg, and Usha Chakravarthy. Age-related macular degeneration.
      JAMA, 331(2):147, Jan 2024.

[30] David B. Rein, John S. Wittenborn, Xinzhi Zhang, Amanda A. Honeycutt, Sarah B. Lesesne, Jinan Saaddine, and
      Vision Health Cost-Effectiveness Study Group. Forecasting Age-Related Macular Degeneration Through the Year
      2050: The Potential Impact of New Treatments. Archives of Ophthalmology, 127(4):533–540, April 2009.

[31] Annalisa Buniello, Daniel Suveges, Carlos Cruz-Castillo, Manuel Bernal Llinares, Helena Cornu, Irene Lopez,
      Kirill Tsukanov, Juan María Roldán-Romero, Chintan Mehta, Luca Fumis, Graham McNeill, James D Hayhurst,
      Ricardo Esteban Martinez Osorio, Ehsan Barkhordari, Javier Ferrer, Miguel Carmona, Prashant Uniyal, Maria J
      Falaguera, Polina Rusina, Ines Smit, Jeremy Schwartzentruber, Tobi Alegbe, Vivien W Ho, Daniel Considine,
      Xiangyu Ge, Szymon Szyszkowski, Yakov Tsepilov, Maya Ghoussaini, Ian Dunham, David G Hulcoop, Ellen M
      McDonagh, and David Ochoa. Open targets platform: facilitating therapeutic hypotheses building in drug
      discovery. Nucleic Acids Research, 53(D1):D1467–D1475, 12 2024.

[32] Siddharth Narayanan, James D. Braza, Ryan-Rhys Griffiths, Manu Ponnapati, Albert Bou, Jon Laurent, Ori Kabeli,
      Geemi Wellawatte, Sam Cox, Samuel G. Rodriques, and et al. Aviary: Training language agents on challenging
      scientific tasks, Dec 2024.

[33] Yingyu Mao and Silvia C. Finnemann. Analysis of photoreceptor outer segment phagocytosis by rpe cells in
      culture. Methods in Molecular Biology, page 285–295, 2012.

[34] Yingyu Mao and Silvia C. Finnemann. Acute rhoa/rho kinase inhibition is sufficient to restore phagocytic capacity
      to retinal pigment epithelium lacking the engulfment receptor mertk. Cells, 10(8):1927, Jul 2021.

[35] Eva Halasz and Ellen Townes-Anderson. Rock inhibitors in ocular disease. ADMET and DMPK, 4(4):280, Dec
      2016.

[36] K. Hollanders, T. Van Bergen, N. Kindt, K. Castermans, D. Leysen, E. Vandewalle, L. Moons, and I. Stalmans. The
      effect of ama0428, a novel and potent rock inhibitor, in a model of neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
      Investigative Ophthalmology and; Visual Science, 56(2):1335–1348, Jan 2015.

[37] Hiroyuki Kamao, Atsushi Miki, and Junichi Kiryu. Rock inhibitor-induced promotion of retinal pigment epithelial
      cell motility during wound healing. Journal of Ophthalmology, 2019:1–10, Jun 2019.

[38] Midori Maekawa, Toshimasa Ishizaki, Shuken Boku, Naoki Watanabe, Akiko Fujita, Akihiro Iwamatsu, Takashi
      Obinata, Kazumasa Ohashi, Kensaku Mizuno, and Shuh Narumiya. Signaling from rho to the actin cytoskeleton
      through protein kinases rock and lim-kinase. Science, 285(5429):895–898, Aug 1999.

                                                                     13
[39] Saoud Al-Khuzaei, Suzanne Broadgate, Charlotte R. Foster, Mital Shah, Jing Yu, Susan M. Downes, and Stephanie
      Halford. An overview of the genetics of abca4 retinopathies, an evolving story. Genes, 12(8):1241, Aug 2021.

[40] G. Malek, L. V. Johnson, B. E. Mace, P. Saloupis, D. E. Schmechel, D. W. Rickman, C. A. Toth, P. M. Sullivan, and
      C. Bowes Rickman. Apolipoprotein e allele-dependent pathogenesis: A model for age-related retinal degeneration.
      Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 102(33):11900–11905, Aug 2005.

[41] George Inana, Christopher Murat, Weijun An, Xiang Yao, Ian R. Harris, and Jing Cao. RPE phagocytic function
      declines in age-related macular degeneration and is rescued by human umbilical tissue derived cells. Journal of
      Translational Medicine, 16(1):63, March 2018.

[42] Zhibo Si, Yajuan Zheng, and Jing Zhao. The Role of Retinal Pigment Epithelial Cells in Age-Related Macular
      Degeneration: Phagocytosis and Autophagy. Biomolecules, 13(6):901, June 2023. Number: 6 Publisher:
      Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.

[43] Kai Kaarniranta, Sinha , Debasish, Blasiak , Janusz, Kauppinen , Anu, Veréb , Zoltán, Salminen , Antero,
      Boulton , Michael E., , and Goran Petrovski. Autophagy and heterophagy dysregulation leads to retinal pigment
      epithelium dysfunction and development of age-related macular degeneration. Autophagy, 9(7):973–984, July
      2013. Publisher: Taylor & Francis _eprint: https://doi.org/10.4161/auto.24546.

[44] Mathias Baedeker, Michael S. Ringel, and Clemens C. Möller. 2024 FDA approvals exceed average number but
      have lower sales projections. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 24(2):85–85, January 2025. Bandiera_abtest: a
      Cg_type: Biobusiness Briefs Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.

[45] Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E. Terry. Rank Analysis of Incomplete Block Designs: I. The Method of Paired
      Comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952. Publisher: [Oxford University Press, Biometrika Trust].

[46] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React:
      Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models, Mar 2023.

[47] K.C. DUNN, A.E. AOTAKI-KEEN, F.R. PUTKEY, and L.M. HJELMELAND. Arpe-19, a human retinal pigment
      epithelial cell line with differentiated properties. Experimental Eye Research, 62(2):155–170, Feb 1996.

[48] Chi-Chin Sun, Hsiao-Ting Chiu, Yi-Fang Lin, Kuo-Ying Lee, and Jong-Hwei Su Pang. Y-27632, a ROCK Inhibitor,
      Promoted Limbal Epithelial Cell Proliferation and Corneal Wound Healing. PLOS ONE, 10(12):e0144571,
      December 2015. Publisher: Public Library of Science.

[49] Eun Jee Chung, Nikolaos E. Efstathiou, Eleni K. Konstantinou, Daniel E. Maidana, Joan W. Miller, Lucy H.
      Young, and Demetrios G. Vavvas. AICAR suppresses TNF-α-induced complement factor B in RPE cells. Scientific
      Reports, 7(1):17651, December 2017. Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.

[50] Peng Li, Dong Fu, Qingfeng Sheng, Shenghua Yu, Xingqi Bao, and Zhibao Lv. TUDCA attenuates intestinal
      injury and inhibits endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated intestinal cell apoptosis in necrotizing enterocolitis.
      International Immunopharmacology, 74:105665, September 2019.

[51] Renzhe Cui, Lianji Tian, Di Lu, Huiying Li, and Jun Cui. Exendin-4 Protects Human Retinal Pigment Epithelial
      Cells from H2O2-Induced Oxidative Damage via Activation of NRF2 Signaling. Ophthalmic Research, 63(4):404–
      412, December 2019.

[52] Teru Hideshima, Paola Neri, Pierfranchesco Tassone, Hiroshi Yasui, Kenji Ishitsuka, Noopur Raje, Dharminder
      Chauhan, Klaus Podar, Constantine Mitsiades, Lenny Dang, and et al. Mln120b, a novel iκb kinase βinhibitor,
      blocks multiple myeloma cell growth in vitro and in vivo. Clinical Cancer Research, 12(19):5887–5894, Oct
      2006.

[53] P J Zhou, H Wang, G H Shi, X H Wang, Z J Shen, and D Xu. Immunomodulatory drug FTY720 induces regulatory
      CD4+CD25+ T cells in vitro. Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 157(1):40–47, July 2009.

[54] C-C Chiang, W-L Chen, J-M Lin, and Y-Y Tsai. Allogeneic serum eye drops for the treatment of persistent
      corneal epithelial defect. Eye, 23(2):290–293, Jan 2008.

[55] Mingming Yang, Koju Kamoi, Yuan Zong, Jing Zhang, Yaru Zou, and Kyoko Ohno-Matsui. Ripasudil as
      a Potential Therapeutic Agent in Treating Secondary Glaucoma in HTLV-1-Uveitis: An In Vitro Analysis.
      International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 25(6):3229, March 2024.

[56] Varvara Maksimova, Julia Makus, Valeriia Popova, Anzhelika Prus, Olga Usalka, Ekaterina Trapeznikova,
      Ekaterina Zhidkova, Gennady Belitsky, Marianna Yakubovskaya, and Kirill Kirsanov. Histone Methyltransferases
      as a New Target for Epigenetic Action of Vorinostat. Biochemistry (Moscow), 88(7):968–978, July 2023.

[57] Anika E. Wagner, Christine Boesch-Saadatmandi, Dorothea Breckwoldt, Charlotte Schrader, Constance Schmelzer,
      Frank Döring, Koji Hashida, Osamu Hori, Seiichi Matsugo, and Gerald Rimbach. Ascorbic acid partly antagonizes
      resveratrol mediated heme oxygenase-1 but not paraoxonase-1 induction in cultured hepatocytes - role of the
      redox-regulated transcription factor Nrf2. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine, 11(1):1, January 2011.

                                                                     14
[58] Gang Lei, Yan Xia, and Kenneth M. Johnson. The Role of Akt-GSK-3βSignaling and Synaptic Strength in
      Phencyclidine-Induced Neurodegeneration. Neuropsychopharmacology, 33(6):1343–1353, May 2008. Publisher:
      Nature Publishing Group.

[59] Tsuyoshi Hirota, Jae Wook Lee, Peter C. St. John, Mariko Sawa, Keiko Iwaisako, Takako Noguchi, Pagkapol Y.
      Pongsawakul, Tim Sonntag, David K. Welsh, David A. Brenner, Francis J. Doyle, Peter G. Schultz, and Steve A.
      Kay. Identification of Small Molecule Activators of Cryptochrome. Science (New York, N.Y.), 337(6098):1094–
      1097, August 2012.

[60] Abdelhabib Semlali, Sofia Papadakos, Camille Contant, Ikram Zouaoui, and Mahmoud Rouabhia. Rapamycin
      inhibits oral cancer cell growth by promoting oxidative stress and suppressing ERK1/2, NF-κB and beta-catenin
      pathways. Frontiers in Oncology, 12, September 2022. Publisher: Frontiers.

[61] Robert Torka, Kinga Pénzes, Simone Gusenbauer, Christine Baumann, István Szabadkai, Lászlo O˝ rfi, György
      Kéri, and Axel Ullrich. Activation of HER3 Interferes with Antitumor Effects of Axl Receptor Tyrosine Kinase
      Inhibitors: Suggestion of Combination Therapy. Neoplasia, 16(4):301–318, April 2014.

[62] Akio Ohta, J Kjaergaard, S Sharma, M Mohsin, N Goel, M Madasu, E Fradkov, Akiko Ohta, and M Sitkovsky.
      In vitro induction of T cells that are resistant to A2 adenosine receptor-mediated immunosuppression. British
      Journal of Pharmacology, 156(2):297–306, January 2009.

[63] Gurpreet K. Aulakh, Björn Petri, Katarzyna M. Wojcik, Pina Colarusso, James J. Lee, and Kamala D.
      Patel. Inhibiting focal adhesion kinase (FAK) blocks IL-4 induced VCAM-1 expression and eosinophil
      recruitment in vitro and in vivo. Journal of Leukocyte Biology, 104(1):147–158, 2018. _eprint:
      https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/JLB.3MA1117-429R.

[64] Qian Jiang, Jie Yin, Jiashun Chen, Xiaokang Ma, Miaomiao Wu, Xilong Li, Kang Yao, Bi’e Tan, and Yulong
      Yin. 4-Phenylbutyric acid accelerates rehabilitation of barrier function in IPEC-J2 cell monolayer model. Animal
      Nutrition, 7(4):1061–1069, December 2021.

[65] Chang-Hee Kang, Rajapaksha Gendara Prasad Tharanga Jayasooriya, Yung Hyun Choi, Sung-Kwon Moon,
      Wun-Jae Kim, and Gi-Young Kim. β-Ionone attenuates LPS-induced pro-inflammatory mediators such as NO,
      PGE2 and TNF-αin BV2 microglial cells via suppression of the NF-κB and MAPK pathway. Toxicology in Vitro,
      27(2):782–787, March 2013.

[66] Ziad Sartawi, Katie B. Ryan, and Christian Waeber. Bone regenerative potential of the selective sphingosine 1-
      phosphate receptor modulator siponimod: In vitro characterisation using osteoblast and endothelial cells. European
      Journal of Pharmacology, 882:173262, September 2020.

[67] Michael I. Love, Wolfgang Huber, and Simon Anders. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for
      RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biology, 15(12):550, December 2014.

[68] Steffen Durinck, Paul T. Spellman, Ewan Birney, and Wolfgang Huber. Mapping identifiers for the integration of
      genomic datasets with the R/Bioconductor package biomaRt. Nature Protocols, 4(8):1184–1191, August 2009.
      Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.

[69] EnhancedVolcano: publication-ready volcano plots with enhanced colouring and labeling.

                                                                     15
5 Supplementary Material

5.1 Supplementary Figures

Human Input                                                                 Candidate Generation Goal

              Dry age-related macular degeneration                               Screen a diverse small‐molecule library to identify compounds
                                                                                that enhance RPE‐mediated phagocytic clearance of photorecep...
Generated Queries for Crow LLM
                                                                                                             LLM
       Comprehensive literature on molecular pathways underlying..          Generated Queries for Crow
       Detailed mechanistic data on drusen biogenesis and complem..
       Mechanistic insights into dysregulated autophagy and..                    “Photoreceptor segment uptake assay” AND “small molecule..
       Collection of relevant cell culture assay platforms for..                 “Focused library” AND “high-throughput screening” AND..
        Comprehensive review of inflammasome activation and chr...               “Small molecules” AND “lysosomal enhancement” OR “cathepsin..
                                                                                 “Drug repurposing” AND “ocular bioavailability” AND “autoph...

                              Crow                                             ...
Literature Review
                                                                                                             Crow
      Retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cell culture models—both..           Literature Review
      The cellular pathology in dry age‐related macular degene..
      The complement cascade is a central mediator of inflammation..              The screening strategy employs a phenotypic high-throughput..
      Autophagy and phagocytosis dysfunction in retinal pigment epi..             The current body of literature using human iPSC-derived ret..
      Inflammatory signaling in co‐cultures of retinal pigment...                 Recent evidence supports the strategic integration of focused..
                                                                                  The current literature on RPE phagocytosis demonstrates clear...

Experimental Assay Generation LLM                                      LLM      ...

     Chronic Sublytic Complement Challenge Assa                             Therapeutic Candidate Generation LLM
     CFH Risk Variant Gene-Edited RPE Assa
     A2E Photooxidation and ROS Generation Assa                                   Danicopan (ACH-4471; MedChemExpress #HY-12345) will inhibit..
     Mitophagy and Mitochondrial Membrane Potential Rescue Assa                   SB290157 (Tocris #3782) will antagonize the C3a receptor..
     Autophagic Flux Restoration Assay using mCherry-EGFP-LC3 Reporte             PMX205 (Tocris #2119) will serve as a high‐affinity C5a..
     NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation and Inhibition Assa                            Cp40 (AMY-101; catalogue #S6189) will bind complement protein..
     Photoreceptor Outer Segment Phagocytosis Enhancement Assa                    MCC950 (MedChemExpress #HY-12815) will inhibit the NLRP3..
     Barrier Integrity under Complement Stress Assa                               Y-27632 (Tocris #1254) will inhibit Rho-associated kinase..
     In Vitro Drusen-Like Deposit Formation Assa                                  Rapamycin (Sigma #R0395) will inhibit mTORC1 in RPE cells..
     Multiplex High-Content Phenotypic Screening Platform                         Metformin (Sigma #31739) will activate AMPK in RPE cells..
                                                                                  Dimethyl fumarate (Tecfidera; Biogen #NDC 0078-1600-02) will...

Experimental Assay Evaluations Crow                                             ...

      The assay employs human retinal pigment epithelial (RPE)..            Therapeutic Candidate Evaluations Falcon
      This assay leverages CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing to generate..
      This assay utilizes iPSC-derived retinal pigment epithelium..               Danicopan, also known as ACH-4471, is a low‐molecular‐weight..
      This assay employs cultured retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)..              SB290157 is a synthetic, nonpeptide small-molecule antagonist..
      This assay employs retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) monolay..               PMX205 is a synthetic cyclic peptide designed as a C5a recep..
      This assay is designed to model a key inflammatory aspect of..              Cp40 (AMY-101) is a synthetic peptide inhibitor belonging to..
      This assay is designed to evaluate therapeutic strategies for..             MCC950 is a small‐molecule inhibitor belonging to the diary..
      This in vitro assay uses primary human retinal pigment..                    Y-27632 is a small‐molecule inhibitor originally developed..
      The proposed assay employs human induced pluripotent stem..                 Rapamycin (also known as sirolimus, Sigma #R0395) is a natur..
      This assay is designed as a 384-well multiplex high-content...              Metformin, originally derived as a synthetic biguanide devel..
                                                                                  Dimethyl fumarate (DMF) is a small, lipophilic methyl ester...

Strategy Selection  LLM                                                         ...

Experimental Assay Selected: Phagocytic clearance assay                     Therapeutic Candidate Ranking LLM

                                                                               1. Cp40 2. To901317 3. Gw3965 4. Ss31 5. Nicotinamide 6. TUDCA
                                                                               7. Fenrentide 8. Exantide 9. ACY-1215 10. Minocycline...

Supplementary Figure S1 Detailed example workflow of Robin experimental assay and therapeutic candidate
                                                     hypothesis generation.

                                                                       16
5.2 Prompts used in this report

5.2.1 Experimental Assay Generation

    Model: o4-mini

    System prompt:
    You are a highly experienced biomedical research strategist. Your task is to propose **mechanistic hypotheses**
    tested via **cell-culture assays** or **therapeutic strategies**. Generate exactly {num_assays} distinct ideas.

    User prompt:
    Return a list of {num_queries} queries (separated by <>) that would be useful in doing research to develop
    detailed, mechanistic cell culture assays that would be used to evaluate drugs to treat {disease_name}. These
    queries will be given to a 20-person scientific team to research in depth, so they should be able to capture broadly
    relevant information (30+ words) and search relevant literature across biomedical, clinical, and biochemical
    literature about the disease or therapeutic landscape. Don’t look up specific drugs, but any relevant scientific
    information that may help with assay development. You have {num_queries} queries, so spread your queries
    out to cover as much ground as possible. Create queries both about the general biochemistry and mechanistic
    underpinnings of {disease_name} as well as about the assays. In formatting, don’t number the queries, just
    output a string with {num_queries} queries separated by <>.

                         Supplementary Figure S2 Prompt for generating literature search queries.

    Model: o4-mini

    System prompt:
    You are a professional biomedical researcher, having experience in early-stage drug discovery and validation in
    vitro. Your task is to propose **mechanistic hypotheses** tested via **cell-culture assays** or **therapeutic
    strategies**. Generate exactly {num_assays} distinct assay ideas. You are meticulous, creative, and scientifically
    rigorous. Focus on strategies that prioritize simplicity, speed of readout, biological relevance, and direct
    measurement of functional endpoints. Strong preference for biologically relevant strategies.

       **Output Format Specification (Strict Adherence Required):**
    Your entire output MUST be a single, valid JSON object. This JSON object will be an **array** at its root,
    containing exactly {num_assays} individual JSON objects. Each of these inner objects represents one distinct
    proposal and MUST conform to the following structure and content guidelines:
    [
    {{

          "strategy_name": "string", # Name of the strategy. Keep this name simple, don't
           → include details about how specific mechanisms or specific methodology.
          "reasoning": "string" # Scientific reasoning justifying the chosen strategy or
           → the feasibility/relevance of the assay design, citing relevant literature.
    }}
    // ... more objects here, up to {num_assays} total
    ]

    User prompt:
    Generate exactly **{num_assays}** distinct and scientifically rigorous proposals for cell culture assays that
    can evaluate drugs to treat {disease_name}. Here is some relevant background information that can guide your
    proposals: {assay_lit_review_output}

                  Supplementary Figure S3 Prompt for generating hypotheses for experimental assays.

                                                                     17
Model: Crow
You are a professional biomedical researcher, having experience in early-stage drug discovery and validation in
vitro. Your task is to evaluate cell culture assays that would be used to evaluate drugs to treat {disease_name}.
Given the following assay, do a comprehensive literature review to evaluate if this assay would be useful for
testing therapeutics for {disease_name}. Search relevant literature across biomedical, clinical, and biochemical
literature about the disease or therapeutic landscape. Don’t look up specific drugs, but any relevant scientific
information that may inform assay development. {Strategy}
Provide your response in the following format, like an evaluation for a scientific proposal:

      Assay Overview: Explain the assay idea, including the following key points: which aspect of the disease
pathogenesis does the assay model, what measurements will be taken from the assay and how they will be taken,
which cells or other biological material are used in the assay.

      Biomedical Evidence: Make a compelling argument for how the aspect of the disease represented in the
assay is central to the pathogenesis of the disease. Make sure to consider both the biomedical and clinical
literature.

      Previous Use: Explain how this assay has previously been used for drug discovery (if this has been done).
Explain any key scientific discoveries which have been made using this assay.

      Overall Evaluation: Strengths and weaknesses of this assay for testing therapeutics for {disease_name}.
       Supplementary Figure S4 Prompt for generating detailed evaluation for each experimental assay

                                                                 18
Model: Claude Sonnet 3.7

System prompt:
You are an experienced drug development committee member, with broad scientific expertise across the biology,
chemistry, clinical, medical, and pharmaceutical sciences.

   Your objective is to perform a rigorous scientific comparison of two proposals for experimental assays that
will be used to test therapeutics for {disease_name}.

   Your evaluation must be based strictly on the presented scientific evidence, scientific novelty, methodological
rigor, and logical interpretation, not on the persuasive quality or wording of the proposal documents.

   Critically assess the scientific soundness and biological rationale for the experimental assay, analyzing the
supporting literature and historical usage.

   Preference for in vitro strategies that prioritize simplicity, speed of readout, biological relevance, and direct
measurement of functional endpoints. Strong preference for biologically relevant strategies.

   The goal of this task is to choose the best in vitro experimental assay that would be scientifically relevant and
insightful for testing therapeutics for {disease_name}. Prefer assays that are biologically functionally relevant
and simple to perform in standard lab setting.

User prompt:
Evaluate the experimental assays using the structure below. This evaluation informs a critical decision.

   **Respond ONLY in the specified JSON format, do not include any text outside the JSON object itself.**
{{
"Analysis": {"type": "string", "description": "[Provide a detailed analysis of the
 → two experimental assays, based on the evaluation criteria and the evidence
 → provided.]"},
"Reasoning": {"type": "string", "description": "[Choose which experimental assay is
 → better. Provide a detailed explanation for why you think the winner is better
 → than the loser, based on the evaluation criteria and the evidence provided.]"},
"Winner": {"type": "string", "description": "[Return the name and ID number of the
 → candidate that you think is better between the two candidates, as a tuple. It
 → should be formatted as (winner_name, winner_id)]"},
"Loser": {"type": "string", "description": "[Return the name and ID number of the
 → candidate that you think is worse between the two candidates, as a tuple. It
 → should be formatted as (loser_name, loser_id)]"},
}}

             Supplementary Figure S5 Prompt for LLM judge to select the top experimental assay

Model: o4-mini

System prompt:
You are a biomedical researcher briefly explaining a strategy of how to identify novel therapeutic compounds to
test using this assay to treat {disease_name}.

User prompt:
Here is a proposed experimental assay identified for treating '{disease_name}':

      Assay Name: "{assay_name}"
      Synthesize a concise and specific research goal for the *next* stage, which is focused on **identifying
novel therapeutic compounds** to test using this assay to treat {disease_name}.
      It’s important that you connect the goal of this assay to how it is important for **identifying** novel
therapeutic compounds to treat {disease_name}.
      Provide ONLY the synthesized goal string as the response.

                Supplementary Figure S6 Prompt for synthesizing goal for candidate generation

                                                                 19
5.2.2 Therapeutic Candidate Generation

    Model: o4-mini

    System prompt:
    You are an expert drug development researcher focused on generating high-quality, specific, testable **drug
    candidates**.

       Your goal is to propose novel, single-agent drug candidates (specific molecules, potentially repurposed, that
    are commercially available; mention catalog numbers if possible).

       You are interested in finding candidates with:
       1. **Strong Target Validation:** The target pathway/mechanism has robust evidence (genetic, functional)
    linking it *specifically* to the disease pathophysiology.
       2. **Relevant Preclinical/Clinical Evidence:** Supporting data exists from disease-relevant models or,
    ideally, preliminary human data (even if from related conditions or pilot studies).
       3. **Mechanistic Specificity:** A clear, well-defined molecular mechanism is preferable over broad, non-
    specific actions.
       4. **Novelty (Balanced with Validation):** Innovative, exciting, and novel approaches that can advance
    treatment for {disease_name}, that are also grounded in strong scientific rationale and evidence.
       - Focus on compounds that are commercially available (mention catalog numbers) and can be developed into
    drugs
       - Favor mechanisms with minimal impact on other cellular functions
       - Compounds should be novel for treatment of the disease and ideally address novel targets for the diseased
    cell type (i.e. not tested in prior studies)

    User prompt:
    Return a list of {2*num_queries} queries (separated by <>) that would be useful in doing background research
    for the goal of {candidate_generation_goal}.

       These queries will be given to a highly-trained research team to investigate the scientific literature in depth,
    so the queries should be able to capture broadly relevant information (30+ words) and search relevant literature
    across biomedical, clinical, and biochemical literature about the disease or therapeutic landscape. You don’t
    need to propose specific drugs, but the queries should be able to capture relevant scientific information that may
    help with proposing drug candidates.

       You have {2*num_queries} queries, so spread your queries out to cover as much ground as possible. Generate
    {num_queries} queries to cover literature about the therapeutic landscape, especially those that can help
    {candidate_generation_goal} and generate {num_queries} queries to cover literature about the biological and
    mechanistic aspects about {disease_name} itself. In formatting, don’t number the queries, just output a string
    with {2*num_queries} queries separated by <>.

       Generate queries for the goal of {candidate_generation_goal} that actively seek and prioritize:
       * **Target Validation:** Studies demonstrating the target pathway’s dysregulation or causative role.
       * **Efficacy in Relevant Models:** Evidence of the drug candidate’s efficacy in cell or animal models that
    *closely mimic* disease pathology, or in patient-derived cells. Prefer this over general mechanism-of-action
    studies.
       * **Mechanism Confirmation:** Studies confirming the candidate engages the target and modulates the
    specific pathway *as hypothesized* in a relevant biological system.
       * **Pharmacokinetics/Safety Data:** Existing data on the candidate’s ADME properties, safety profile
    (especially human data), and known ability to reach relevant tissues.

                       Supplementary Figure S7 Prompt for generating queries for literature search

                                                                     20
Model: o4-mini

System prompt:
You are an expert drug development researcher focused on generating high-quality, specific, testable **drug
candidates**. Your task is to generate novel, testable therapeutic candidates for {disease_name}, based on the
provided research goal and background literature.

   You are interested in discovering and proposing candidates with:
   1. **Strong Target Validation:** The target pathway/mechanism has robust evidence (genetic, functional)
linking it *specifically* to the disease pathophysiology.
   2. **Relevant Preclinical/Clinical Evidence:** Supporting data exists from disease-relevant models or,
ideally, preliminary human data (even if from related conditions or pilot studies).
   3. **Developmental Feasibility:** The candidate has known properties that facilitate development.
   4. **Mechanistic Specificity:** A clear, well-defined molecular mechanism is preferable over broad, non-
specific actions.
   5. **Novelty (Balanced with Validation):** Innovative approaches are valued, but must be grounded in
strong scientific rationale and evidence.
   For EACH hypothesis object in the `hypotheses` array, you MUST provide ALL of the following fields:

      1. `candidate`: The specific drug/therapeutic proposed. Must be a single agent, not a combination. Do
not propose special formulations or delivery methods.

      2. `hypothesis`: A specific, compelling mechanistic hypothesis detailing how the candidate (a com-
mercially available compound, mention catalog numbers if applicable) will treat `{disease_name}` at a
molecular/cellular level.

      3. `reasoning`: Detailed scientific reasoning, explaining the mechanistic rationale, evidence, transla-
tional considerations, target validation, and novelty of the candidate.

   **Output Format Specification (Strict Adherence Required):**
   Your entire output MUST be a text block. Generate exactly {num_candidates} candidate proposals.
   Each candidate proposal MUST start with "<CANDIDATE START>" on a new line and end with "<CANDI-
DATE END>" on a new line.
   Within each block, each piece of information (CANDIDATE, HYPOTHESIS, REASONING.) MUST start on
a new line, beginning with its EXACT header (e.g., `CANDIDATE:`, `HYPOTHESIS:`) followed by the content.
   Do NOT include any other text before the first "<CANDIDATE START>" or after the last "<CANDIDATE
END>".
   Example for one candidate (repeat this block structure {num_candidates} times):
   <CANDIDATE START>
   CANDIDATE: The specific drug/therapeutic proposed. Must be a single agent, not a combination. Do not
propose special formulations or delivery methods.
   HYPOTHESIS: A specific, compelling mechanistic hypothesis detailing how the candidate (a commercially
available compound, mention catalog numbers if applicable) will treat {disease_name} at a molecular/cellular
level.
   REASONING: Detailed scientific reasoning, explaining the mechanistic rationale, evidence, translational
considerations, target validation, and novelty of the candidate.
   <CANDIDATE END>

User prompt:
Generate exactly **{num_candidates}** distinct and scientifically rigorous proposals for therapeutic candi-
dates to treat {disease_name}. Here is some relevant background information that can guide your proposals:
{therapeutic_candidate_review_output}

                Supplementary Figure S8 Prompt for generating therapeutic candidate hypotheses

                                                                 21
Model: Falcon

You are an expert drug development team leader focused on validating **drug candidates**. Your task is to
evaluate promising repurposed drugs or therapeutic candidates for {disease_name} proposed by your research
team.

      Given the following therapeutic candidate, do a comprehensive literature review to evaluate if this thera-
peutic candidate has potential for {disease_name}. Search relevant literature across

      biomedical, clinical, and biochemical literature about the disease or proposed therapeutic. This must be
very detailed and comprehensive, as it will determine the direction of the team.
{Candidate}
Provide your response in the following format, like an evaluation for a scientific proposal:

   Overview of Therapeutic Candidate: Explain the natural or synthetic origins of this therapeutic candidate,
including how it was synthesized or discovered. Explain which class of therapeutic compounds this belongs to,
and how this class of compounds has previously been used in general.

   Therapeutic History: Summarize previous biochemical, clinical or veterinary uses of this drug or drug class,
if any. Examine to see if the therapeutic candidate has ever been used for treating {disease_name} or any similar
disease.

   Mechanism of Action: Explain the known mechanism(s) of action of this compound to the full extent of
molecular detail that is known. Explain the biochemistry and molecular interactions of the therapeutic candidate
in any relevant literature.

   Expected Effect: Explain the expected effect of this compound in the assay proposed and the mechanism by
which it will act. If the drug is acting on proteins, reference literature which shows this gene is expressed in the
cell type being assayed.

   Overall Evaluation: Give your overall thoughts on this therapeutic candidate. Include strengths and weak-
nesses of this therapeutic candidate for treating {disease_name}.

    Supplementary Figure S9 Prompt for generating detailed investigation for each therapeutic candidate

Model: Finch

Analyze the zipped .fcs files from three 96-well plates to measure average Alexa Fluor 647 signal in live retinal
pigment epithelial cells across different drug treatments.
Use the metadata file to match well positions (e.g., A1) with their corresponding drug treatments and plate
information. Use fcsparser to parse the files.
Create appropriate gates using the "DMSO control + beads + cells + DAPI" well to isolate the live, singlet cell
population. Make the necessary plots to identify the required gating thresholds. I recommend using polygon
coordinates to remove debris, dead cells, and doublets or aggregates. Make sure to exclude all debris, and
that the singlet gating is not too strict. Once you have the best gating strategy possible that gives reasonable
percentage gated events, check the gating on the other two control wells to make sure comparable percentage
gated events.
Determine if there are plate-to-plate effect, if there is, take appropriate normalization steps using the DMSO
control before downstream analysis.
Measure the Alexa Fluor 647 signal intensity in these cells, and compile the results into a CSV file.
Determine if there are any drug treatments that significantly increased signal compared to control. I recommend
using the Dunnett test to compare the drug treatments to the DMSO control. Generate a barplot showing the
average Alexa Fluor 647 fluorescence values for each drug treatment with error bars showing the standard error
of the mean, include highlighting any drugs that significantly increase Alexa Fluor 647 signal using asterisks to
denote significance. Exclude any control treatments in the final plot.
Do not stop early. Make sure you have processed all files available.

       Supplementary Figure S10 Prompt for performing flow cytometry analyses from zipped .fcs files

                                                                 22
Model: Claude 3.7 Sonnet

System prompt:
You are an experienced drug development committee member, with broad scientific expertise.

   Your objective is to rigorously compare two preclinical drug candidate proposals. Your primary goal is
to select the hypothesis with the **highest probability of successful experimental outcome AND eventual
translation into a viable therapy** for {disease_name}.

   Your evaluation must be based strictly on the presented scientific evidence, scientific novelty, methodological
rigor, and logical interpretation. Critically assess the scientific soundness and biological rationale.

   **Prioritize your evaluation based on these key criteria, reflecting human expert preferences:**
   1. **Strength and Relevance of Supporting Evidence (Highest Priority):**

      * **Existing Data:** Is there robust existing data (preclinical, clinical, especially for {disease_name} or
highly relevant biological contexts) supporting the hypothesis? Give significant weight to positive data from
later-stage research (e.g., in vivo, clinical trials for the drug or drug class, especially if successful for related
conditions).

      * **Relevance to the Problem:** Is the evidence *directly relevant* to the proposed mechanism in the
context of {disease_name} and the specific biological problem being addressed? General efficacy in unrelated
conditions is less compelling.

      * **Negative Evidence:** Are there known failures, lack of efficacy, or contradictory data for this
drug/class in relevant contexts? This is a strong deterrent.

      * **Quality of References:** Are the cited references (if any are explicitly mentioned or implied by the
reasoning) strong and relevant to the drug and its proposed action in this context?

   2. **Mechanism of Action (MoA) - Clarity, Plausibility, and Specificity for {disease_name}:**
      * **Clarity & Detail:** Is the MoA clearly articulated, scientifically sound, detailed, and plausible?

Vague mechanisms are less favored.
      * **Directness:** How *direct* is the MoA to addressing the core pathology of {disease_name}? Prefer

hypotheses targeting core, upstream issues relevant to the disease’s cellular or molecular basis over indirect or
downstream effects, unless the indirect effect is exceptionally well-supported and highly plausible.

      * **Specificity & Target Biology:** Is the therapeutic target well-defined? Is its biology central to the
pathogenesis of {disease_name}? Specific pathway/target engagement is preferred over overly broad actions
that might increase risk.

   3. **Safety, Tolerability, and Risk Profile (High Priority):**
      * **Known Safety Profile:** What is the known safety profile of the drug or drug class? Candidates with

established clinical safety (e.g., repurposed drugs with a *strong rationale* for {disease_name}) are highly
favored.

      * **Off-Target Effects/Toxicity:** Are there significant concerns about off-target effects, general toxicity,
or specific organ/system toxicity relevant to {disease_name} or its treatment? This is a major red flag. Assess
potential for on-target and off-target liabilities.

      * **Pleiotropic Effects:** Consider if broad (pleiotropic) effects are beneficial or detrimental in this
specific disease context.

   4. **Feasibility of Experimental Plan and Drug Delivery:**
      * **Methodological Rigor:** Does the proposal (even if brief) outline a clear, methodologically sound, and

feasible experimental plan? Are specific, measurable outcomes related to the therapeutic goal for {disease_name}
defined?

      * **Model System Relevance:** Is the proposed model system (e.g., relevant cell lines, animal models of
{disease_name}) appropriate and predictive?

      * **Drug Delivery to Target:** Crucially, assess the feasibility of drug delivery to the target tissue or
system. Consider physicochemical properties and ADME/PK profiles (bioavailability, metabolic stability) in
terms of achieving therapeutic concentrations with an acceptable therapeutic window. Is the proposed route of
administration plausible and supported for this drug type and disease?

   5. **Scientific Novelty (Balanced with Evidence and Safety):**
      * Does the hypothesis offer a novel scientific advancement for {disease_name}? Novelty is valued, but

*only if supported by plausible science and a reasonable safety outlook*. Do not prefer novelty if it comes at
the cost of strong evidence for a more established, safer approach. An innovative approach to an underexplored
but plausible pathway can be positive.

   **Synthesize these factors:**

                                                                 23
   While detailed pharmacological properties (in vitro potency, selectivity, SAR, chemical liabilities) and
ADME/PK parameters (CYP inhibition/induction, DDI risk) are important, **focus on their *implications* for
efficacy, safety, and translatability, as a human expert panel would.** Avoid getting lost in excessive technical
detail unless it directly and significantly impacts one of the prioritized criteria (e.g., a PK issue preventing target
engagement would be critical).

   The goal of this task is to choose the best therapeutic candidate that has the most potential for treating
{disease_name}.
User prompt:
Evaluate the preclinical drug candidate data package using the structure below. This evaluation informs a critical
decision.

   **Respond ONLY in the specified JSON format, do not include any text outside the JSON object itself.**
{{
"Analysis": {"type": "string", "description": "[Provide a detailed analysis of the
 → two drug candidates, based on the evaluation criteria and the evidence
 → provided.]"},
"Reasoning": {"type": "string", "description": "[Choose which drug candidate is
 → better. Provide a detailed explanation for why you think the winner is better
 → than the loser, based on the evaluation criteria and the evidence provided.]"},
"Winner": {"type": "string", "description": "[Return the name and ID number of the
 → candidate that you think is better between the two candidates, as a tuple. It
 → should be formatted as (winner_name, winner_id)]"},
"Loser": {"type": "string", "description": "[Return the name and ID number of the
 → candidate that you think is worse between the two candidates, as a tuple. It
 → should be formatted as (loser_name, loser_id)]"},
}}

          Supplementary Figure S10 Prompt for LLM judge to rank therapeutic candidate hypotheses

                                                                 24
a  b

Supplementary Figure S11 Robin LLM judge preferences align with human expert evaluations. A) The Robin LLM
judge preferences align well with human expert evaluations, selecting an average of 7.25 of their top 10 hypotheses. B)
The Robin LLM judge is more consistent in its preference when selecting between two hypotheses than human experts.

Supplementary Figure S12 (A) Fluorescence microscopy images of ARPE-19 cells treated with DMSO vehicle (left)
 or MFGE8 (positive control; right). (B) Flow cytometry histograms showing the fluorescence intensity of ARPE-19

                      cells treated with the DMSO vehicle, MFGE8 or the ROCK inhibitor Y-27632.

                                                                     25
Supplementary Figure S13 Human analysis of round 1 flow cytometry data. (A-D) gating strategy. (A) The main cell
population is identified. (B) Singlets are identified. (C) Dead cells are gated out (D) Alexa 647 background is gated out.
(E) Barplots showing normalized gross alexa 647 signal, net alexa 647 signal (DMSO control subtracted) and cell count

  per condition (after passing all gates). Error bars show the standard error of the mean. Asterisks denote statistical
                           significance: p<0.05 (*), p<0.01 (**), p<0.001 (***) (Dunnett’s test).

                                                                     26
Supplementary Figure S14 Human analysis of round 2 flow cytometry data. (A-D) gating strategy. (A) The main cell
population is identified. (B) Singlets are identified. (C) Dead cells are gated out (D) Alexa 647 background is gated out.
(E) Barplots showing normalized gross alexa 647 signal, net alexa 647 signal (relative to DMSO control) and cell count

  per condition (after passing all gates). Error bars show the standard error of the mean. Asterisks denote statistical
                           significance: p<0.05 (*), p<0.01 (**), p<0.001 (***) (Dunnett’s test).

                                                                     27
         a                                                               IFFO2 TUFT1
                                                                                                 PDLIM5
             250
             200                                                         NPPB             FSTL3
             150                                                                     FHL2
             100                                                                  JPH2
                                                                               PPP1R12B
               50
                 0                                                                       TGFB2

                                                                                   STK3

− Log10 P                                                                                8  LLBH
                                                                               HBEGF

                                                                                            ENC1

                                                                         CCN1  GADD45DALC1
                                                                                          BCAR3

                                                                               SERTAD4

                        DUSP2                                                                  DAPK3             ARRDC3
                                                                         DUSP8 NEXN                                    ABCA1
                                                                 EGR1
                                                                                                                 GEMBMF
                                                                               CD274LMONDR1G1                     TENT5A

                                                                   SGK1                     MSMO1
                                                           NYAP2
                                                                               EDN1            ZC3H12A
                                                                                            NIPAL4
                                                                         GADD45G TRHAATCTRF13MDFBO2S1LD12        ID3          GAS1
                                                                                                                      KRT13
                                                           FOS                                                   IL33

                                                                                            SLC25A33                                  HES2

                    -6         -4                                              -2                          0           2                    4

                                                                 Log2FC (Y27632 + beads vs. WT + beads)

         b              actin filament organization

                          ribonucleoprotein complex

                                               biogenesis
                    small GTPase−mediated signal

                                             transduction

                        ncRNA processing

                                regulation of actin
                        filament−based process

                        ribosome biogenesis                                                                            p.adjust

                        regulation of autophagy                                                                              3.0e−08
                                                                                                                             6.0e−08
                                      macroautophagy                                                                         9.0e−08
                                                                                                                             1.2e−07
                                   cellular response to
                                      external stimulus                                                                Count
                                     regulation of actin                                                                    40
                                                                                                                            80
                           cytoskeleton organization                                                                        120
                                protein localization to                                                                     160
                                                  nucleus

                            rRNA metabolic process

                                   cellular response to
                                 extracellular stimulus

                                       regulation of cell
                                        morphogenesis

                                      rRNA processing

                                 actin filament bundle
                                            organization

                    actin filament bundle assembly

                             regulation of cell−matrix
                                                 adhesion

                            focal adhesion assembly

                                 transcription by RNA
                                           polymerase I

                                                           0.01          0.02               0.03           0.04  0.05
                                                                                   GeneRatio

Supplementary Figure S15Human analysis of the RNA sequencing experiment (A) Volcano plot showing differential

gene expression between ARPE-19 cells treated with Y-27632 versus vehicle control (DMSO). The x-axis represents

      log2 fold change in expression, with positive values indicating up-regulation and negative values indicating
down-regulation. The y-axis shows –log10 of the p-value for each gene, highlighting statistical significance. Genes that

 pass the significance threshold (|log2FC| > 1, p < 0.05) are colored (red for up-regulated, blue for down-regulated),
  while non-significant genes are displayed in gray. (B) Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis (using biological

process terms) of differentially expressed genes performed using the ReactomePA package. The y-axis lists

significantly enriched GO terms, while the x-axis shows the gene ratio, calculated as the number of input genes

associated with each GO term divided by the total number of input genes. Dot size corresponds to the number of genes

mapped to each term, and color indicates the adjusted p-value, reflecting statistical significance of the enrichment.

                                                                                            28
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome                                Celiac Disease

       1. N-Acetylcysteine                                      1. ZED1227
       2. Sitagliptin                                           2. BL-7010
       3. Empagliflozin                                         3. Latiglutenase
       4. INT131                                                4. AMG 714
       5. Dihydroberberine                                      5. Tofacitinib
       6. MSDC-0602K                                            6. Aspergillus niger prolyl endopeptidase
       7. Dapagliflozin                                         7. Bifidobacterium longum CECT 7347
       8. BGP-15                                                8. 4-Phenylbutyric acid
       9. Trodusquemine                                         9. Lactobacillus casei ATCC 9595
     10. Anakinra                                             10. Epigallocatechin gallate

Supplementary Figure S16. 10 Therapeutic Candidates      Supplementary Figure S17. 10 Therapeutic Candidates
Proposed by Robin for Polycystic Ovary Syndrome          Proposed by Robin for Celiac Disease

    Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease                              Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis

           1. CKD-504                                               1. Pamrevlumab
           2. Recombinant Human Neuregulin-1 β-1                    2. GSK3008348
                                                                    3. BI 1015550
               EGF-like Domain                                      4. GB0139
           3. TUDCA                                                 5. KD025
           4. Fasudil                                               6. GKT137831
           5. Guanabenz                                             7. CC-90001
           6. Arimoclomol                                           8. BMS-986278
           7. Ricolinostat                                          9. X203
           8. 4-Aminopyridine                                      10. Dimethyl Fumarate
           9. GSK269962A
          10. Y-27632

Supplementary Figure S18. 10 Therapeutic Candidates      Supplementary Figure S19. 10 Therapeutic Candidates
Proposed by Robin for Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease        Proposed by Robin for Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis

    Non-alcoholic Steatohepatitis                            Sarcopenia

           1. Resmetirom                                            1. Bimagrumab
           2. Aldafermin                                            2. Tirasemtiv
           3. Saroglitazar                                          3. Reldesemtiv
           4. Pegbelfermin                                          4. SS-31
           5. VK2809                                                5. S48168
           6. Tropifexor                                            6. Urolithin A
           7. Cilofexor                                             7. Setanaxib
           8. EDP-305                                               8. Elamipretide
           9. Pemafibrate                                           9. JTV-519
          10. PXL770                                               10. Rolipram

Supplementary Figure S20. 10 Therapeutic Candidates Supplementary Figure S21. 10 Therapeutic Candidates

Proposed by Robin for Non-alcoholic Steatohepatitis      Proposed by Robin for Sarcopenia

                                                     29
Age-related hearing loss                                 Glaucoma

       1. Nicotinamide Riboside                                 1. Netarsudil
       2. N-acetylcysteine                                      2. Y-27632
       3. Tauroursodeoxycholic Acid                             3. Ripasudil
       4. Metformin                                             4. ISTH0036
       5. Rapamycin                                             5. Fasudil
       6. MitoQ                                                 6. Rapamycin
       7. Etanercept                                            7. Verteporfin
       8. Resveratrol                                           8. Pirfenidone
       9. SKQ1                                                  9. KD025
     10. Quercetin                                            10. Losartan

Supplementary Figure S22. 10 Therapeutic Candidates      Supplementary Figure S23. 10 Therapeutic Candidates
Proposed by Robin for Age-related hearing loss           Proposed by Robin for Glaucoma

    Friedreich’s Ataxia                                      Chronic Kidney Disease

           1. Deferiprone                                           1. OLT1177
           2. Omaveloxolone (RTA 408)                               2. VX-765
           3. EPI-743                                               3. Tranilast
           4. Leriglitazone                                         4. MCC950
           5. Elamipretide                                          5. Brilliant Blue G
           6. SS-31                                                 6. Disulfiram
           7. RG2833                                                7. CY-09
           8. Dimethyl fumarate                                     8. A-438079
           9. KH176                                                 9. Oridonin
          10. Nicotinamide riboside                                10. INF4E

Supplementary Figure S24. 10 Therapeutic Candidates Supplementary Figure S25. 10 Therapeutic Candidates

Proposed by Robin for Friedreich’s Ataxia                Proposed by Robin for Chronic Kidney Disease

                                                     30
